Chapter 13
"I MIGHT have known," said Connie. "And after the lengths my friend went to providing his friend for you. So there we had him on top of us all the evening." "Anyhow, you're back early." "What else would you suppose? No, this is the last time I take you under my wing, let me tell you. Go on: resume your usual habits." "I didn't, Connie," said Louie, flopping like a flatfish across her bed, shoeless. "Oh, my feet!" Connie scolded: "Round in those silly shoes!" "All right then, I'm silly all over--go on, say it. Still, it was a pity you didn't come where I was, even if it wasn't just where you said. They had ever such a variety of snacks. And another thing--" "Well, so they had a variety of snacks where we were.--What other thing?" "I got right in a drama." "Oh, I've had quite enough of that for tonight, thank you," Connie declared, yawning. Standing in cami-knickers in front of Louie's front-room gas fire, she balanced herself as she peeled off one stocking, then the other. "And listen: if you wish me to sleep down here in your bed with you, you go on and pop in ahead and warm it. I don't see why I should be the one to get the gooseflesh." "You are kind, Connie." "Well, rather that than up two flights in the nude. It's all one to me--though, mind you, I'm never sure this is healthy. Got your clock set?" "It never went off this morning." "Then I shouldn't be surprised if you never set it. Let me look--give it here." Connie gave the alarm clock a good shake. "Anyhow, what do you mean," she went on, "drama? If you're going to tell me you got in a fight, don't--I have had enough of all that monotony. Or if not, then whatever kept you so long?" Louie, halfway through pulling her nightgown over her head, explained in a muffled voice, "Walked home." "Whatever made you do that with the trains running! No wonder you felt your feet." "I got asked to accompany someone back." "There's nothing I can see wrong with _clock__," said Connie, coming to put it back on the bedside chair, "but that's the most I can say.--Got that nightie for me?" A spare one of Louie's for Connie's use was nowadays kept under Tom's pillow. "Well, shove over," she ordered in a minute or two. "And mind," she added, bouncing critically once or twice on the springs on Tom's side, "whatever you do or don't dream during the night, don't you start kicking me with your toe-nails like you did last time: that's one of the things I don't get married for. Or maybe it was as a precaution your husband seems to have hollowed himself this deep trough? You ought to get this mattress seen to, once conditions show any sign of becoming normal--though, of course, again, one sign of conditions becoming normal should with luck be you having your husband coming nipping back; in which case far be it from me to dictate. I'd as soon lie level, but men are more nervous.--You creamed your face?" "I don't think I'll bother, Connie.--You like to use my cream, though?" "Nn-nn, I'll let it ride. Where has the fatal gift of beauty been getting Connie lately, I should like to know?--I'll tell you what, however: _you__ ought to watch your pores. It could be your not having a London skin." So Louie turned out the light. But, "Oh, _there__," she complained, "Connie, you went and left on the fire!"--"Well, I haven't yet known you seven years, have I? While you're at it, you'd better undo the window, just in case that clock of yours should _not__ go off." Upon Louie's getting out with a resigned flop, Connie took the chance of appropriating the extra amount of blanket wanted for her cocoon. Louie, for her part, dawdled rather on the return journey, taking some time to feel her way round the furniture. "Buck up," grumbled Connie, "Lady Macbeth! So it was the drama you accompanied home, or what?" But this evening for Louie had rung the knell of Harrison, man of mystery, as a subject: she found, with a shock, that what she now most wanted was never to speak of him again. A fog of abhorrence was already settling over his features, blotting out what he said, blanketing the cuttingly quiet edge of his tone of voice. It seemed unseemly, even, that his companion should have claimed for him the prerogative of pain: Louie simultaneously felt he could never suffer and wished he might. It was not so much that she could not forgive him as that he seemed to her born to repulse forgiveness, with indeed all things else: tonight's most strong impression had been that in all Harrison there was no place in which to receive anything. Oh, what had come over her, in talking to Connie, thus to have baited her talk? The truth was, she very much wanted to speak of Stella--but as to that, also, probably better not. Very many nights it was Connie's way to drop into sleep bang, like a devil down through a trapdoor--much was it to be hoped this might happen now. But of course, not. "Mm-mm?" persisted Connie, yanking one arm out over the bedclothes to spank at her own hip-bone, making sure in the dark it was always there, "so what?" Louie tried a yawn like a lion's. "Oh Con--I--am--so--tired!" "What do you imagine I am, always upon the watch? Not to speak of this evening, dragging around that spare. What's the matter with you is, you're getting stealthy!" "Oh no, truly. No, all that happened was, me starting by taking a fancy to a dog. It seemed so sad. Which led me into getting into conversation with its owners." "What were they doing, then--ill-treating it?" "Oh no. No, they were sitting at a table. 'Well,' they said, 'it always is something to meet a fellow dog-lover.' I said, 'Funny you calling your dog Spot when it hasn't got any,' so they took that well and asked me to join them, making a third." "Then married, were they?" "Oh no. No, her husband was dead. No, they weren't married." "Then in that case how could they both have the same dog?... No, you've mucked up two evenings, it seems to me. So along you came, you mean, with your fatal charm, and broke that up, then saw him home?" "On the contrary, Connie. He got indisposed so remained behind with the dog, and I saw her home. I went as far as her door. She and I became friendly. She was refined." "She was what?" "Refined." "No wonder her friend passed out." "That I did _not__ say! No, now you are too bad--keeping on taking me up like that! If that is all you are going to do, just you leave me quiet!" Louie heaved round to facing the other way, taking with her all she could in the way of bedclothes, thereby creating tautness with draught beneath it between her form and the unyielding Connie's. She drew her knees up and drove her profile forward, blunted, into her pillow. All this having been registered by the bed-springs, Connie muttered: "There you go--take on, do!" Tensity, silence. Connie acted as one thinking no more of it. But then a spring uncoiled--she brought out her arm again and dealt a wallop at the behind of Louie. "You don't have to mind me," she said, "you great sissy!" "It isn't you only. It's the taking and taking up of me on the part of everyone when I have no words. Often you say the advantage I should be at if I could speak grammar; but it's not only that. Look the trouble there is when I have to only say what I _can__ say, and so cannot ever say what it is really. Inside me it's like being crowded to death--more and more of it all getting into me. I could more bear it if I could only say. Now she tonight, she spoke beautifully: I needn't pity her--there it was, off her chest. If I could put it like she does I might not be stealthy: when you know you only can say what's a bit off, what does it matter how much more off it is? He was fit to strike her, but then she passed it off--if the way she did pass it off made him fit to strike her--so there was _I__ left with him ugly, which I cannot forget.... At home where I used always to be there never used to be any necessity _to__ say; neither was there with Tom, as long as they let him stop here. But look now--whatever _am__ I to, now there's the necessity? From on and on like this not being able to say, I seem to get to be nothing, now there's no one. I would more understand if I was able to make myself understood; so you know how it is, how I try everything. Excuse me, Connie, after your kindness, but you keeping asking only makes me take on. I'd sooner you some ways than a strange person; and I see you're right--to have been so happy-go-lucky like I've been does not appear true to Tom. All it is is, there's always this with a man--it need not have to come up what you cannot say. I would far sooner you there if you'd only _be__ there, just." Connie did not reply. "What's the matter, Connie?" "Can't I think?" "Oh, if that's all it is." "All I can say is, if I was you I shouldn't worry my head. You are not so much more peculiar than many others. I cannot say what anyone ought to do, really.... It's late, you know." "Why, yes, I suppose it is." "You can tell it is, from the quiet." They lay listening to what, under analysis, was only sound at further remove: nocturnal train-sounds, shunting, clanking and hissing, from the network of Marylebone lines. "Hark at those marshalling-yards," grumbled Connie, "you might as well be in Germany." Then a moment later, something faltered over the ceiling: searchlights out. "Funny it would be," Louie remarked, "to see light like we used to see on that ceiling, standing still. We did used to have a lamp just outside there in the street, therefore you have no idea how different this room used to be all through the middle of the night. It could have kept us awake. And that tree behind the yard, for instance; when there was a window lighted behind that the pattern of that tree used to come right on this very same bed. It used to be so lifelike you saw it move; Tom remarked you could know it was a plane tree.--Think the searchlights mean anything?" "Nn-nn: they're obliged to keep fidgeting them about." "We ought to go to sleep, then." "Yes, I said." Connie reared up for the last time to scratch inside an armpit, then settled down--so dead still that the feeling of her beside one was that of Lot's Wife horizontal. Indeed, this applying of her whole force of character to the will to sleep was disturbing, going on close beside one--Louie, back on her back again, clasped her hands under her head and stared up at nothing--it was oppressive, though, how much of nothing there was: she escaped from underneath that, in a minute more, into wondering how Stella had done her hair. But how were you to tell?--there had been the hat. Most of all, there had been the effect--the effect, it said, was what you ought all to go for. Black best of all, with accessories, if you were the type. The effect of this person?... Invisible powder, mutiny, shock, loss; sparkle-clip on black and clean rigid shoulders; terror somewhere knocking about inside her like a loose piece of ice; a not-young face of no other age; eyes, under blue-bloomed lids, turning on you an intent emptied look, youth somewhere away at the back of it like a shadow; lips shaped, but shaping what they ought not; hat of small type nothing if not put on right, put on right, exposingly; agony ironed out of the forehead; the start, where the hair ran back, of one white lock.--What had been done to her? Where had she got herself?--Fine wrist watch not to be recollected apart from the fine wrist-bone, on her reaching down to pick up the fallen gloves. Good of her--but, dwelling on them like that? You might have thought Mrs. Rodney had not seen gloves before.... Louie felt herself entered by what was foreign. She exclaimed in thought, "Oh no, I wouldn't be _her__!" at the moment when she most nearly was. Think, now, what the air was charged with night and day--ununder-standable languages, music you did not care for, sickness, germs! You did not know what you might not be tuning in to, you could not say what you might not be picking up--affected, infected you were at every turn. Receiver, conductor, carrier--which was Louie, what was she doomed to be? She asked herself, but without words. She felt what she had not felt before--_was__ it, even, she herself who was feeling? She wondered if she would ever find Stella's house, the steps at whose foot they had said goodnight in the dark, again; still more she wondered if she would want to. "But this is not goodbye, I hope," had been said--but what, how much, had she meant to mean? This fancy taken to Louie, this clinging on, were these some sick part of a mood? Here now was Louie sought out exactly as she had sought to be: it is in nature to want what you want so much too much that you must recoil when it comes. Lying in Chilcombe Street, grappling her fingers together under her head, Louie dwelled on Stella with mistrust and addiction, dread and desire. Out of all the communicativeness during the zigzag walk back to Weymouth Street, there had risen not one reference to Harrison: instead, the talker had been dashing patchily back through her own past--partly as though to know by the spoken sound of it if it _were__ true, partly as though she could not put too great a distance between herself and what had happened half an hour ago. She had come back and back to a son she had in the Army. Anxious?--why not; this was her only son. "He should be a comfort to you," Louie had interposed, "Oh, yes, _he__ is a comfort to _me__!" Having been walking fast, the talker had from that point on walked faster; Louie had been put to it to keep up with her even with her own famous big flat stride. Fast?--no, it had been something more than that: Mrs. Rodney walked like a soul astray. Those three words reached Louie imperatively, as though spoken--memory up to now had been surface pictures knocked apart and together by the heavings of a submerged trouble. Now her lips seemed bidden: "A soul astray," they repeated with awe, aloud. Then in alarm she listened: silence. She listened longer--unseen Connie might have been stone dead. "_Connie__?" There came a hiss of breath. "Well, what?" replied Connie in a sharp sleepless voice. "I couldn't hear you breathe." "Nor I was, till you go and make me." "What _were__ you doing, then?" "Trying what those Indians are said to do." "Which Indians?--You did give me a fright." "Fakers." "Whatever don't they do that for?" "To attain themselves to the seventh degree of consciousness." "Whoever told you? Tom never repeated anything like that about the Indians when he writes letters; and he is observant.--Anyway, what d'_you__ want to be conscious for like that?" "I'm peculiar," Connie said in a Delphic tone. "If I'm not to be one thing then I'd as soon be the other one hundred per cent. I've never been so wakeful--must be something I ate: nothing's pure these days. No, I'm not in pain, nor is it fullness or wind, only the universe fevering round inside my head.--Ever got a bicarbonate?--No, I suppose not." "We did have, but Tom took them in the Army.--However, I could always look in the drawer." "What's the use of looking in the drawer when they're in the Army?--No, if I've got to have the universe in my head I might as well look it in the eye. There ought to be some advantage in seeing it in proportion, which is all it requires. I should not mind if I did. You can but try; it can do no further harm." "You might stop your heart." "Look, you buzz off back to sleep!" "I haven't been asleep." "What were you talking in your sleep for, then? I was right on the point of attaining when you made me jump." "Ever so sorry." "Oh well, how were _you__ to know?" "All the same, I do wish you wouldn't, Connie." "_Now__ I doubt if I can.... And where are you getting to, I'd like to know--crying out like that after a stray soul?"
Chapter 14
ONE thing _was__ out of the question: telephoning to Robert. There needed to be no question--when, having parted from Louie, Stella was again, alone, in her flat--of eyeing the telephone, wondering whether to or not to. Robert tonight was at Holme Dene. Summoned to a family convocation, he had arranged, he had that morning told her, to dash down there by the seven o'clock train. The occasion was without precedent: what had happened was this--Mrs. Kelway had had an offer for the house. By post had arrived the thunderbolt: one of the many agents upon whose books Holme Dene had reposed for so many years had, without warning, written saying he had a buyer; or, at least, a client ready to reach that point. To say that the proposition unsettled Mrs. Kelway and Ernestine would be an understatement; it threw them into disarray. Simultaneously, they declared that the deciding of anything, either way, was repugnant; and equally, that it would be unsuitable for them to decide anything, with or without repugnance, without Robert. Ernestine's letter to him to this effect had been such a combination of haste and length that he could only reply, as indeed he had, that he had not the pleasure of understanding her. She had refused to telephone on the matter except in a series of groans, warning hisses and hydrophobic laughs, interspersing what sounded to be a code. Muttikins and she, she reiterated, quite saw that of course the war and Robert's conduct of it came first; at the same time, could he not find some teeny-weeny space in which to attend to the affairs of his own family? Muttikins was being wonderful, but it seemed unfair. Thus had they got him there: there he was. Already for an hour they had been at it: now the clock in the lounge stood at 9.15--Ernestine, owing to the seriousness of the occasion, had decided to give the news a miss. The curtains over archways and windows were close drawn; the decorative squints in the inglenook wore what looked like eye-patches of black cotton. The tray carried in with fuss for Robert had been carried out again with just less fuss, Mrs. Kelway and Ernestine having watched him eat. The children, if not asleep, were in bed--a sense of midnight already filled the lounge; the fire, having consumed its last feed for the day, burned low. Screens had been so concentrated as to form an alcove for Mrs. Kelway's chair; in this she knitted with that unflickering velocity which had alarmed Stella. Ernestine, on the opposite side of the hearth, was doing nothing other than thinking hard--as, she explained, she and they all must do, in view of the shortness of Robert's time and the necessity of deciding _something__. Sitting upright on a coffin stool collected by her father at an antique shop, she wore her uniform and a hat. As for Robert, it was useless to suggest he should sit down, though they indomitably continued to do so--up and down the lounge, to and fro across it, Between the original oak pieces and the visiting mahogany furniture, he paced: he paused, stared, stood. When he ever did come to a standstill on the hearthrug, it was with the effect of sighting some resolution, which again each time he abandoned without giving it words. His keeping in movement thus gave the Kelway triangle an unfixed third point: to address Robert involved a perpetual turning of the head--at least on the part of Ernestine; Mrs. Kelway seemed to see no more reason to make this concession than to make any other. The Kelways communicated with one another with difficulty, in the dead language. At intervals, the recurrence of a remark showed that yet another circle around the subject had been completed. "It is _something__, at any rate," Ernestine once again said to Robert, "that you are here. The telephone is never the same. And with letters keeping crossing each other, by the end we might not be clear what we all feel." "Whereas," said Robert, momentarily resting his elbow on the top of the upright piano, "we are now?" "We are becoming clearer than we might have been, I think--wouldn't you say so, Muttikins?" went on Ernestine, hopefully glancing across at the other chair. Upon Mrs. Kelway's having said nothing, Ernestine had to qualify: "If it was not so difficult." "Let us sum up," said Robert. "A., we don't know if we want to sell; B., if we do, how much more than the offer are we to hope to get; and, C., again, if we do sell, where are you and Muttikins to go next?" At these words his mother did bestir herself. "I am afraid," she said, "it is not so simple as all that." "It's no good rushing things, Robert," Ernestine pointed out. "Better take everything one by one. There are always the children. And suppose Amabelle did not like the idea?" "Amabelle," said Mrs. Kelway contemptuously, "cannot get out of India. But there is more in addition." "Muttikins," went on Ernestine, "cannot help feeling that there must be something behind this offer." She glanced across again: Mrs. Kelway indicated that yes, this was what she could not help feeling. "What's _behind__ the offer is someone's wanting to buy the house." "Oh, I daresay, Robert; but it is so sudden. It is not even as if this was a safe area." "Nothing has happened," said Mrs. Kelway in an offended tone. "Oh, indeed no, Muttikins, and why ever should it!" Having sacrificed some seconds to laughing the idea off, Ernestine resumed: "Of course it's nice being a neutral area, not evacuated into, not evacuated out of, therefore quite quiet; but even so... who can be after a house no one has seen?" "Certain no one _has__ seen it?" "No one we do not know has been to the door." "Well, it can be seen from the road, at this time of year, or at any rate from a little way down the drive." "We do not care for people coming down the drive," said Mrs. Kelway. "That," agreed Ernestine, "is exactly what we do not like the idea of. If they want the house, why cannot they come to the door and openly ring the bell? Creeping and spying about when we did not know, calculating the value of everything, planning how soon they could get us out.... This is England, Robert; one expects to have privacy." "I'd imagine, someone is in a hurry--" "But why? That is what seems suspicious." "Well, you know how it is--" "They need not think they are going to be able to rush _us__," said Mrs. Kelway. "_We__ did not ask them to buy the house." "Still, we have left it 'for sale' for years on the agents' books; which, one must face it," said Robert, "comes to the same thing." "They are trying to take advantage of us," said Mrs. Kelway. "But this is our home." "If that's how we do feel, how simple," hastily declared Robert. "We turn 'em down." "But it is too large." "In that case, we beat 'em up." "We have many associations with it," said Ernestine. "In _that__ case, beat 'em up still higher." Mrs. Kelway allowed herself, over her knitting, an infinitesimal frozen pause. "I am afraid," she repeated, "it is not so simple as all that." "Muttikins," said Ernestine, after a feeling silence, "is astonished. And I don't wonder. You talk, Robert, as though everything could be valued in money. You talk as if this was just a business transaction." "Surely that's what you got me down to discuss?" "We have not yet decided whether we wish to transact anything. This has been a shock. We hoped you might understand our point of view. After all, our father bought this house himself, and we all moved into it out of Meadowcrest, because it would be nicer. And so in ways it has been." "It always has," said Mrs. Kelway, "been too large. And with these days it is now too larger. Especially as it seems we have no privacy, the rates are high. Your father made a mistake, but it could not be helped; we have done our best. We had to install a new cistern, which was expensive; and this room and the drawing-room had to be redecorated in 1929. All that should be taken into consideration." "Our father," Robert pointed out to Ernestine, "saw his mistake in a flash, even before there had been time to rub it in--that was done later. It was he who put down the house on the agents' books." "We had at one time," Mrs. Kelway agreed, "become accustomed to the idea of selling it. But that was long ago." "You feel you could be happy, Muttikins, in something smaller?" "It is not a question of happiness," Mrs. Kelway said, "it is a question of the future. That is for you and Ernestine. I have had my life and I hope I have done my best. Your father used to say he had not much to complain of. The cistern and the improvements to the reception rooms and the improvements to the garden, including the pergola and the statues of fairies, which were ordered by Ernestine at the Ideal Home Exhibition and came to more than we expected, as they charged for delivery, will I hope be taken into consideration. The children like them. But you must not expect me to be with you long." "Muttikins," shrieked out Ernestine, "don't say such _dreadful__ things!" Mrs. Kelway raised her small silvered head, which gleamed under the light of a standard lamp, to look across at Ernestine with contempt. "You talk," she said, "as though you expected not to die yourself. We shall all come to that, including the children. I have no objection to taking facts as they come, but what we now have to decide about are changes. And we should be certain of the value of things: it would not do to be taken advantage of. I have the receipts for everything in my room. In addition--" --The telephone rang, from the other side of a curtained arch. Robert, starting violently, turned in its direction: he stopped in his tracks and listened--tense, fair, gaunt, at bay. Ernestine bounded up from the coffin stool, exclaiming with the resigned air of an indispensable person: "That will be the W. V., for me!" She shot through the archway. Robert waited; Mrs. Kelway knitted--evidently Ernestine had been right. He relaxed sharply, glanced across at his mother, lighted a cigarette. He then, as Ernestine's talk protracted itself, walked to the foot of the staircase and looked up. Above-stairs Holme Dene was silent: without a creak it sustained the stresses of its architecture and the un-sureness, manifestly indifferent to it, of its fate. Upstairs, as elsewhere, it had been planned with a sort of playful circumlocution--corridors, archways, recesses, half-landings, ledges, niches and balustrades combined to fuddle any sense of direction and check, so far as possible, progress from room to room. The plan demanded the utmost in the way of expenditure on passage carpets and woodwork paint. What could be puzzling was that now, at night, with the hearing tuned in, so much space should give out so little reverberation. These two upper floors (for another staircase, beyond a swing door, led on up to Robert's and other attics, in an extensive range) were, in fact, not hollow, being flock-packed with matter--repressions, doubts, fears, subterfuges and fibs. Or so he felt. The many twists of the passages had always made it impossible to see down them; some other member of the family, slightly hastening his step as they heard one's own, had always got round the next corner just in time. A pause just inside, to make sure that the coast was clear, had preceded the opening of any door, the emergence of anyone from a room. The unwillingness of the Kelways to embarrass themselves or each other by inadvertent meetings had always been marked. Their private hours, it could be taken, were spent in nerving themselves for inevitable family confrontations such as meal-times, and in working on to their faces the required expression of having nothing to hide. At the same time, the intelligence service had been good: everyone knew where everyone else was and, in time, what everyone else was up to. Failure again to be present, after an interval, always had brought a messenger to the bedroom door or a call from the garden under the window; while to be come on looking out of a window had been to be asked to specify what one was looking _at__. It had not been possible for anybody to leave the house unseen--dashing across a lawn or heading down the drive one held oneself ready to be challenged; a potter through the boundary woods could at any time be black-marked as "hiding"; and as for slipping off to the gate postbox, that was above all deprecated--letters might be written, but must be exposed in the hall before collection for post. Amabelle, who early had heard the call of sex, to the accompaniment of suffusing blushes and a roundedness as nonplussing to her wardrobe as to herself, had been martyred for it: no one could have been merrier on the subject than Ernestine, or more repudiatingly icy than the sisters' mother. (Mrs. Kelway's way of saying "your father" still, years after that guilty creature's death, vibrated with injury; the implication was that he had become a father at her expense.) Robert in adolescence had taken to photography, which secured him an alibi, a dark room whose door he could respectably lock, and a more or less free pass out, for technical requirements, to the nearest town. Chiefly, Holme Dene had been a man-eating house: as such it was one of a monstrous hatch-out over southern England of the 1900's. Conceived to please and appease middle-class ladies, it had been bought by a man whose only hope was this--as a home Holme Dene might seem to be an outmoded model, but it remained a prototype. Lock-shorn, without the bodily prestige of either a soldier or a manual worker, as incapable of knocking anybody about as he was of bellowing, Mr. Kelway had been to be seen seeing out at Holme Dene the last years of an existence which had become derisory. Prestige from his money-making, unspectacular but regular, had been nil; his sex had so lost cast that the very least it could do was to buy tolerance. Only in the odd reflex or revulsion which had caused him, so soon after the move here, to put Holme Dene down as for sale again on the agents' books had Robert's father been in any way out of type. What unformulated anarchical dreams he had entertained one would never know. Unstated indignities suffered by the father remained burned deeply into the son's mind--Mr. Kelway, by his insistence on Robert's constantly looking him in the eye, may have meant to challenge his son to recognise any one of them. His fiction of dominance was, as he would have wished, preserved by his widow and his daughters. Robert's hand reposed where he remembered seeing his father's--on the polished knob terminating the banisters. Nothing but a whiff of carbolic soap from the children's bathroom came down to him: upstairs life, since the war, had up there condensed itself into very few rooms--swastika-arms of passage leading to nothing, stripped of carpet, bulbs gone from the light-sockets, were flanked by doors with their keys turned. Extinct, at this night hour stygian as an abandoned mine-working, those reaches of passage would show in daylight ghost-pale faded patches no shadow crossed, and, from end to end, an even conquest of dust. These days, the daily servants fled Holme Dene, superstitiously, long before darkness fell: sent to bed, Anne and Peter had the empty top to themselves. It was to be hoped that Ama-belle's children were impermeable. When Ernestine came back from the telephone, Mrs. Kelway said to her: "What is Robert doing?" "What are you doing, Robert?" "Looking upstairs." "Why, anything wrong?" "No." "Oh.--It _has__ been a day!" said his sister, sitting down again as though with little hope of remaining in that attitude long. "There has been first one thing and then another. And I shouldn't wonder if there was more to come." "Ernestine has not been able to take her hat off," said Mrs. Kelway. "Still, it's different now we have something to show," said Ernestine. "One hardly likes to say so, but look at Montgomery! Mrs. Jebb has just told me there was something further on the nine o'clock news. When we miss that something has always happened. But tonight that is not the point.--How far _had__ we got?" "Muttikins had been saying she would not be always here." "Muttikins was being extremely naughty!--No, the thing is: _ought__ we to sell, or not?" "Or, to put it the other way, do we want to?" "These days one cannot always be thinking of what one wants." "I never have thought of what I wanted," said Mrs. Kelway. "Perhaps it might have been better if no one else had." "If everybody were more like Muttikins," observed Ernestine, "the world would be very different from what it is." "Really I doubt that," said Robert suddenly, picking up a paperknife from a table, putting it down again. "Many people are unsuccessful imitations of Muttikins.--No, from the practical point of view, Ernie, I'm afraid it's merely a question of whether to sell now or later on. You can hang on on the assumption prices will go up; but as you so rightly say, that so much depends. This is not a house that many people would want--" His mother said: "Yes, it is merely our home." "Then again, of course," he went on, raising his voice, "there's the question of where you two would go next. You naturally," he said with uncontrollable coldness, "must live somewhere." "We should not at all care to live just _anywhere__, either!" cried Ernestine with a good deal of spirit. "Naturally." "We had both hoped, Robert, that you might think of something, instead of merely agreeing with what we say. If we did not already agree with what we say there would be no point in our saying it, would there?--What so much depends on is, after the war: one doesn't know now what will be nicest then. And by that time Amabelle may be tired of India." "Amabelle," interposed their mother, "will be in no position to say. She has no claims of any kind. Your father dealt with her suitably when she married. If she and her husband expect more they are quite mistaken. I had always quite understood they understood at the time. If they are mistaken they had better stay in India: they went of their own accord. She was anxious to marry and did not stop to think. We have taken the children when it was not convenient; one would not expect the children to understand, but that is the most Amabelle should expect. This house is to be left to you, Ernestine, and Robert, jointly. If you do not care for it, you had better say so." "Oh but of course we care!" wailed Ernestine, hysterically thumping backward her green felt hat, with the W. V. S. lettering, from her forehead. "How can I ever forget this is my home?" "And how can I?" chimed in Robert. "It would not be your home if your husband had not died," said Mrs. Kelway, looking at Ernestine disparagingly. "I never should have forgotten it, in any case," said the widow. "Nobody is asking you to forget it," said her mother, feeling round in her knitting-bag for a fresh ball of wool. "But we see that Robert is saying nothing." "Oh, where _I'm__ concerned," he cried merrily, "_I__ say, sell!" There ensued a resounding pause. "That is what I expected," said Mrs. Kelway. Ernestine spun round on the coffin stool to examine Robert as though for the first time. There escaped from her a quite new demoralised laugh: head on one side, she heard it with some alarm. She then complained: "Well, you need not put it so violently!" Mrs. Kelway said: "Robert does not remember." "There you are quite wrong, Muttikins," said her son. Mrs. Kelway allowed herself one more pause--less a query than a taking of note. "Indeed..." she remarked. Ernestine meanwhile raked a worried look round the lounge, as though something from outside had got into it. "Yes, Robert, indeed." Again he had taken up his stand--this time, it might really be, ominously--on the rug between his sister and mother. He had placed himself where it was impossible not to see him; and Mrs. Kelway, admitting this, glanced his way--as unflinchingly as if he had drawn a gun. She appeared to measure his height, from the feet up. Then: "He talks like a man," she said, contracting her little shoulders. But that was lost: her son had suddenly turned and was looking beyond the screens at the staircase. "Hel-_lo__!" he exclaimed. "Who's here?" "Me, Uncle Robert," said Anne, coming on down. "_Anne__!" expostulated Ernestine. "Oh, Auntie Ernie, _please__!" Clipclopping in slippers across the floor, overcoat over her striped pyjamas, Anne made for Robert, holding up her face to be kissed. "We were not allowed to stay up," she said, "so I came down. Why are you standing up like that?--are you just going?" "Both of you," scolded Ernestine, "ought to be sound asleep!" "Peter is," Anne said in a righteous tone. "Grannie does not care for people creeping about," said Mrs. Kelway. "I know, but--" "--Don't say, 'I know' to Grannie." "Well, I do know, but it's Uncle Robert's fault for coming so late." "He did not come to see you." "I know; but I don't see why I should not see him." "Because Grannie and Auntie Ernie and Uncle Robert are deciding business." "I know, but--" "Anne, if you keep saying 'I know' you will have to go back to bed immediately. As it is, you must go back to bed at once.--Robert, you encourage her!" "No, she encourages me. _Now__ this begins to look like an evening." He bore out the statement by throwing himself into an armchair, scooping up Anne to make her sit on the arm. "All the same, what an un-clever, un-funny little girl you are," he told her, gripping her by the back of her coat-belt, not altogether kindly rocking her to and fro, to the peril of her not certain balance. "Why don't you ever manage to think up anything? Why not be walking in your sleep?" "Because I'm awake," Anne said, struggling round to face him. But so near did that bring her eyes to her uncle's forehead that she recoiled, blinking, as though a pang of the mistrust as to the reality of the moment were passing through her. She loved him with, in her respectable way, the first intensity of her life: so much so that the woman she would become stared askance at him out of her child's features. He was right, she was a dull little girl--without animal poetry, without guile, but formed for devotion: inopportune, staunch, ruddy. But within that little stout breast, as it filled out, there would from time to time heave up some choking wish--now she was offering all she had, beginning and ending with her power to stand on her head. Reddening, looking down at the toe of her uncle's shoe as though yearning to be the one who had polished it, she asked: "Why can't you stay tonight?" "Because I hate early starts.--How are you?" "I'm all right." "Nothing to tell me?" Anne racked her brains. "I was top at mental arithmetic." "You can tell Uncle Robert all about that next time. Now--" "--Oh, Aunt _Ernie__!" "No really, Ernie," said Robert. "Well then, Anne, a moment. Only a moment, mind." "How many moments _are__ there?" said Anne to Robert. "Sixty seconds make a minute, sixty minutes make an hour; but how many _moments__ are there?" "That has to depend on you." "How long, compared to a minute, is a moment?" "_That__ depends," he repeated, searching her face for the face of someone else. "You are awful," Anne said. "--Are we going to sell this house?" "Don't ask silly questions," interposed her aunt. "Uncle Robert's tired, and so should you be." "But I thought you said he'd say." "Never mind what you thought." "What _do__ you think, Anne," said Robert, irresponsibly turning. "Sell out? Hold on?" Anne bit her upper lip with her lower teeth. "Oh, I don't care; I only wondered. What would anywhere else be like? This house _is__ getting too old to be lived in much longer; the handles are coming off the doors. We could try a new one. And what's the object of this being too big when we can't go into any of the other rooms? If we sold this, with the money should we be rich? Or if not, could we be very poor? I and Peter should rather like to be _something__." "Indeed," said Mrs. Kelway. "And pray, why?" Anne let her weight sag against her uncle's shoulder--as usual when he led on, she had gone too far. "Oo, I don't know; I don't mind," she said with an artificial yawn. "Anne, how you rat!" said Robert. "I don't mind," she doggedly said again. Why should she? Here for her it had been a pat little lifetime without moments, an existence amongst tables and chairs, without rapture or mystery, grace or danger. Never a heartbeat: never the light disregarding act, the random word or spontaneous kiss; never laughter other than those registrations of Ernestine's; anger always in a smoulder, never in a flame. Though she did not know it, she had never seen anyone being happy--what better was to be hoped of a new house if they were all to go there? This was demeaning poverty. Pity the children of the poor. Who, however, knew when the trumpet might not sound and the walls of Jericho might not come crashing down? The telephone rang. Robert this time started outright--so much so that Anne, as though he had thrust her from him, grabbed at the air with a little cry. She recovered herself, but she had betrayed him: his mother fixed their chair with her eye. "The telephone is never for anybody but Ernestine," said Mrs. Kelway. "So what is the matter, Robert? Are you expecting anything?" "If you imagine it is for you, Robert," said Ernestine, clamping herself to her seat with great self-control, "do by all means answer: I should be only too glad." "Knocking the child off the chair," went on Mrs. Kelway, further tried by having to raise her voice above the demoniac ringing of the telephone, "though she had no business to be sitting on the arm." "I simply fell off, Grannie." "You should not sit on your uncle when he is nervous.--Need we have all that ringing?" To her temple she raised one little hand. "It seems so loud--might it be better if someone answered it?" "I'll go--oh, let _me__ go!" Stopping only to hitch her slippers up on her heels, Anne bounded in the direction of the arch. "Ernestine, do you prefer Anne to answer the telephone when she ought to be in bed?" "Sorry, sorry, sorry--certainly _not__--Anne!... I was busy wondering who it could possibly be, at this hour." "Something may have happened," said Mrs. Kelway faintly, contracting under the blast of sound like an anemone. "It might be best if Robert could go and see." "Never mind, never mind, Robert," Ernestine rapped out, buttoning her coat as she strode into action past him. "I will. As you know, I invariably do." Her brother, though he had risen, stood with a hesitancy exaggerated by his height: he towered there in a sheer negation of movement, head half-turned to the curtain marking the ringing telephone. Anne, rooted halfway across the lounge, fixed on him, one could not say how intuitively, her eyes. "Wait," interposed Mrs. Kelway, for an instant removing the guard from her temple, the little hand, "there is no point in Ernestine's answering if it _is__ for Robert. Is he expecting anything?" "No one would ring up about nothing as late as _this"__ said Ernestine, distractedly halting. "The question is, Robert, do they know where you are?" "It does seem very late," said Mrs. Kelway. Robert said: "Ten past ten?" "It does not seem very considerate," said Mrs. Kelway, "unless, of course, something has really happened." "If it _was__ for you, Uncle Robert, would you let me answer?" "Why, yes," he said, staring back at his niece, "why not?" "What should I say to them?" "That I've left here--I'm on my way back to London." "Not quite true, strictly," said Ernestine. The ringing stopped of its own accord. Robert sat down again; Ernestine, hand on the curtain of the important arch, laughed wildly. She then said accusingly: "Now we may never know." "No," agreed Mrs. Kelway. "If it should turn out to have been anything important, I shall always blame myself. Though if it was, it seems funny they should not have kept on. Though, of course, they may always begin again.--At any rate, Anne, _you__ must go to bed: I don't know what you are thinking of!" "I wonder what anybody was thinking of," said her mother. "As a rule in this house we are so prompt." "Now, Anne, now Anne, go and run along!" "If I do run along, may Uncle Robert come up and say goodnight to me?" "No. You have had enough excitement for tonight." "It is not merely that," pointed out Mrs. Kelway. "Anne has already been said goodnight to. I am surprised at her." Anne heard nothing: she had flung her arms round Robert as high up as arms could reach. He stooped; she pressed her cheek to his very cold one, feeling meanwhile, through her unimaginative body, echoes of the beating of his heart. "You're always going," she mumbled, "always going away." However uncaring, he was slow in disengaging himself from this last haven--it was she who withdrew her face from his, the better to be able to look at him; at the same time going through uncertainty as to whether it _was__ better to see, or touch. Nothing solved itself: having shaken all her bed-tousled hair back, she shut her eyes. "You're giving me a crick in my back," he said, beginning to pull away. "You must grow taller." "Just once more...." Pulling his head down, she butted her forehead against his: their brain-cases touched--contact of absolute separations she was not to forget. She turned away and clipclopped to the foot of the staircase and up, up into the darkness, not having looked back once. "Anne is getting to be quite a big girl," observed Mrs. Kelway. "It is a pity." "One way and another," said Ernestine, "there seems to be quite a fatality against our deciding anything. How if I got a pencil and paper to jot down points?" "In addition, there will be Robert's train." "Yes, there'll be my train," he agreed, looking at the clock.
Chapter 15
"And if I am?" he repeated. "If that is what I am doing?" Not a sign, not a sound, not a movement from where she at a distance from him lay, exhausted by having given birth to the question. Her room was bathed in a red appearance of heat from the electric fire; shadows jutted out sharply; a mirror panel reflected the end of the bed on which Robert sat. As though the sensation of this red half-dark of so many nights having within the moment become infernal communicated itself from her to him, he reached across and turned off the fire--the glow from the units died out slowly: the room, absolutely unseeable at last, might now have been any room of any size. Nothing but their two silences merging filled it, and she did not know to what part of silence he had withdrawn till he said: "Because it has been that, all the time." "Why?" "You wonder--yes, I suppose you must. We should have to understand each other all over again, and it's too late now." "Late in the night?" He did not answer. Raising herself in order to be more clearly heard, she said: "Only, why are you against this country?" "Country?" "This, where we are." "I don't see what you mean--what _do__ you mean? Country?--there are no more countries left; nothing but names. What country have you and I outside this room? Exhausted shadows, dragging themselves out again to fight--and how long are they going to drag the fight out? We have come out at the far side of that." "We?" "We who are ready for the next thing." "Can you be so arrogant?--why have I never felt it?" "Because it's not arrogance; it isn't something in me; it's on altogether another scale. Would you have loved me if I'd had nothing else? For the scale it is on, there's so far no measure that's any use, no word that isn't out of the true. If I said 'vision,' inevitably you would think me grandeur-mad: I'm not, but anyway vision is not what I mean. I mean sight in action: it's only now I act that I see.--What is repulsing you is the idea of 'betrayal,' I suppose, isn't it? In you the hangover from the word? Don't you understand that all that language is dead currency? How they keep on playing shop with it all the same: even you do. Words, words like that, yes--what a terrific dust they can still raise in a mind, yours even: I see that. Myself, even, I have needed to immunise myself against them; I tell you I have only at last done that by saying them to myself over and over again till it became absolutely certain they mean nothing. What they once meant is gone.--This is a shock to you, Stella? Or, is it a shock to you?" She did not answer. "Anyway, you're against me?" "You're the one who's against: I've known that without knowing against _what__. Not this country, you say: you say there is no country. Then what are you against?" "This racket. It's not I who am selling out this what you call a country; how could I?--it's sold itself out already." "What racket?" "Freedom. Freedom to be what?--the muddled, mediocre, damned. Good enough to die for, freedom, for the good reason that it's the very thing which has made it impossible to live, so there's no alternative. Look at your free people--mice let loose in the middle of the Sahara. It's insupportable--what is it but a vacuum? Tell a man he's free and what does that do to him but send him trying to dive back into the womb? Look at it happening: look at your mass of 'free' suckers, your democracy--kidded along from the cradle to the grave. 'From the cradle to the grave, save, oh, save!' Do you suppose there's a single man of mind who doesn't realise _he__ only begins where his freedom stops? One in a thousand may have what to be free takes--if so, he has what it takes to be something better, and he knows it: who could want to be free when he could be strong? Freedom--what a slaves' yammer! What do they think they are? I'd guarantee to guarantee to every man the exact degree of freedom of which he's capable--I think you'd see that wouldn't carry us very far. As it is, what? As far as what's nothing can be anything, freedom's inorganic: it's owed at least to the few of us to have a part in strength. We must have something to envisage, and we must act, and there must be law. We must have law--if necessary let it break us: to have been broken is to have been something." "But law--that's just what you break." "Nothing I _can__ break _is__ law!" "What a saying!" "You think, or really you hope, I'm mad?" She did not answer. "At least I am not besotted." In something more powerful than the darkness of the room the speaker had become blotted out: there occurred in the listener one of those arrestations of memory which made it impossible to conceive not only what the look on the face might now be but what the face had been, _as__ a face, ever. The direction from which the voice came seemed so set back in distance as to be polar; the voice itself was familiar only in more and more intermittent notes: it was as though some undercurrent in it, hitherto barely to be detected, all the time forbidden and inadvertent, had come to the top. He did not speak fast, but the effect was of something travelling at the rate of light between word and word. Now he first drew in an audible breath, then moved: the sounds of physical movement came as a shock, reminding her that he after all was a presence here in the room--feet, their naked soles sucking at place after place across the thick neutral carpet, could be heard walking with a hallucinated precision towards the window. He pulled the curtains back. There was a star-filled two o'clock in the morning sky. Man in outline against the panes, his communication with the order of the stars became not human: she, turning where she lay, apprehensively not raising herself on the pillows, stared also, not in subjection but in a sort of dread of subjection, at the mathematical spaces between the burning bright points. "Yes, I know," she said, "but it is not all so vastly simple as all that." She thought or hoped she heard, somewhere between the stars and herself, the hum of a plane tracing its own course; but the sound, if it ever had been a sound, died: nothing intervened. "Come back to me at any rate for a moment," she cried out, "or come nearer." He came back, restlessly, to the end of the bed, where he sat down again. "I've given you any humanity that I had," he said. "Don't quarrel now, at the end, or it will undo everything from the beginning. You'll have to reread me backwards, figure me out--you will have years to do that in, if you want to. You will be the one who will have to see: things may go in a way which may show I was not wrong.--But you hate this too, you hate this most, because I've been apart from you in it, you feel? I have not been: there's been you and me in everything I have done.--You can't see that?" Tearless, she made a wailing movement of the arms above her head. He waited; she said at last: "Still, tell me. If you had told me more--!" "Think again: how could I have involved you? How could I? Was this a thing to put on anyone else?--It was quite a game." "Which you loved." He reflected, then said: "Yes.--What I mean, though, is that, as has been shown, it was not a safe game: you would have been anxious, I supposed. And again, which surely you ought to see, it was not only a question of myself. In a ring, once any one person begins to talk... No, how was I to tell you in so many words?" "You could have told me not in so many words." He again reflected. "Sometimes I thought I had." "When?" "When not? Not at any one moment--but there were times when it seemed impossible that being as we were you should not know. There's been no part of my dis-affectedness that I've hidden from you: did it never strike you I'd have been unendurable if I hadn't found some way, some way that didn't meet the eye, to endure myself? In accepting me, I thought, you must somehow be in your own way accepting this. Or I thought so sometimes--sometimes so much so that I found myself only waiting to speak till you spoke: when you didn't speak I thought you thought silence better. I thought, yes, silence _is__ better: why risk some silly unmeaning battle between two consciences? We've seen law in each other.... There were other times when I was less certain you knew. But I did not know you did not know till you asked me." "The night I came back from Ireland?" "The night you came back from Ireland." "_Then__, you said 'no' to everything point-blank." "You didn't want an answer you couldn't take. That was the night I realised you couldn't take it." "You were angry with me." "There's a difference between being suspected of being what one is and being accepted as being what one is." "That was the night you asked me to marry you." "I wanted to see if you were frightened." "_You__ were frightened." "Did I show that to you?" "You did next day, to Harrison.--Why did you always tell me you didn't know him?" "I didn't know him; I did begin to have some idea who he must be. There'd been always X.--who had always had to be _someone__. So it was that funny type.... You were trying him out on me, then, first, that night we were looking at my tie?" That small picture, with its concourse of others, made her unknot her hands above her head and begin to weep, the more desperately because of the desperate wastefulness of tears now in face of the end of all. Now it was a question of counting the last of the minutes as they ran out into hours, the last of the hours as they ran out into tomorrow, which was already today, as they never had. All love stood still in one single piercing illusion of its peace, now peace was no more. Unlived time was not more innocent than the time lived by them. Now, by calling him back to her from the window, she had broken the last exaltation of his she might ever feel. Now they had dropped into talking in lowered hurried voices, as though already something were at the door. "Oh, why did you?" she cried out. "What made you have to?" "Stella, don't," he said sharply, "don't: you unnerve me!" "Such ideas to have to have--why?" "I didn't choose them: they marked me down. They are not mine, anyhow; I am theirs. Would you want me simply to be their prey? Would you want me simply to be a case? Would you have wanted me not to fight this war?" "No. No, but..." "Then haven't I a right to my own side?" Suddenly stretching across the bed he could be felt feeling about, beside her body, for her hand. She gave it, to have its tensile fingers, the jump of nerves in it or whatever the quality was that it had of life, explored by his cold foreign fingers retrospectively: then he put it away from him. "It was enough," he said, "to have been in action once on the wrong side. Step after step to Dunkirk: the extremity--I could forget it if I had not known what it meant? That was the end of _that__ war--army of freedom queueing up to be taken off by pleasure boats. Days and nights to think in: does nobody ever wonder what became of the thoughts thought then, or what's still to come to them? The extremity--can they not conceive that's a thing you never do come back from? How many of us do they imagine ever have come back? We're to be avoided--Dunkirk wounded men." "I never knew you before you were a wounded man." "In one way that would have been impossible--I was born wounded; my father's son. Dunkirk was waiting there in us--what a race! A class without a middle, a race without a country. Unwhole. Never earthed in--and there are thousands of thousands of us, and we're still breeding--breeding what? You may ask: I ask. Not only nothing to hold, nothing to touch. No source of anything in anything. I could have loved a country, but to love you must have--you have been my country. But you've been too much because you are not enough--are you and I to be what we've known we are for nothing, nothing outside this room?" No answer. Robert had moved again: now he leaned on his elbow across her feet, unmovingly. All she at last said was: "You've been doing just what Harrison said?" "Yes.--So you can't get away from that?" "_We__ can't get away from that.... Were you never frightened?" "Of getting caught?" "I meant, of what you've been doing?" "I?--no, the opposite: it utterly undid fear. It bred my father out of me, gave me a new heredity. I went slow at first--it was stupefying to be beginning to know what confidence could be. To know what I knew, to keep my knowing unknown, unknown all the time to be acting on it--I tell you, everything fell into place round me. Something of my own?--No, no, much better than that: any neurotic can make himself his corner. The way out?--no, better than that: the way on! _You__ think, in me this was simply wanting to get my hand on the controls?" "I don't think I think." "Well, it's not; it's not a question of that. Who wants to monkey about? To feel control is enough. It's a very much bigger thing to be under orders." "We are all under orders; what is there new in that?" "Yes, can you wonder they love war? But I don't mean orders, I mean order." "So you are with the enemy." "Naturally they're the enemy: they're facing us with what has got to be the conclusion. They won't last, but it will." "I can't believe you." "You could." "It's not just that they're the enemy, but that they're horrible--specious, unthinkable, grotesque." "Oh, _they__--evidently! But you judge it by them. And in birth, remember, anything is grotesque." "They're afraid, too." "Of course: they have started something." He raised himself eagerly on his elbow, as though a thought were renewing in him its whole original power. "You may not like it, but it's the beginning of a day. A day on our scale." Instinctively she glanced first at the window, then at the window's reflection in the mirror: both were paler, it seemed to her eyes of dread. All fears shrank to this cold bare irrefutable moment: she shivered indifferently between the sheets. It had been terror of the alien, then, had it, all the tune?--and here it was, breathing its expiring minutes, _his__ expiring minutes, along the foot of her bed. He might have been right in saying she could not have loved him had there been in him no capacity other than for love, but his denials of everything instinctive seemed now to seal up love at the source. Rolled round with rocks and stones and trees--what else is one?--was this not felt most strongly in the quietus of the embrace? "No, but you cannot say there is not a country!" she cried aloud, starting up. She had trodden every inch of a country with him, not perhaps least when she was alone. Of that country, she did not know how much was place, how much was time. She thought of leaves of autumn crisply being swept up, that crystal ruined London morning when she had woken to his face; she saw street after street fading into evening after evening, the sheen of spring light running on the water towards the bridges on which one stood, the vulnerable eyes of Louie stupidly carrying sky about in them, the raw earth lip of Cousin Francis's grave and the pink-stamened flowers of that day alight on the chestnuts in May gloom, the asphalt pathway near Roderick's camp thrust up and cracked by the swell of ground, mapped by seeded grass. She could remember nothing before everything had had this poignancy--and yet they had only been in love for two years. She could not believe they had not, in those two years, drawn on the virtue of what was round them, _the__ virtue peculiar to where they were--nor had this been less to be felt when she was without him, was where he was not, had not been ever, might never be: a perpetual possible illumination for her, because of him, of everything to be seen or be heard by joy. Inside the ring of war, how peaceably little they had moved--never crossed the sea together, seldom left London--so, there had come to be the nature of Nature, thousands of fluctuations, in their stone own country. Impossible that the population, the other people, should at least be less to be honoured than trees walking. All that time, all the same, the current _had__ been against his face? The war-warmed impulse of people to be a people had been derisory; he had hated the bloodstream of the crowds, the curious animal psychic oneness, the human lava-flow. Even the leaden unenthusiasm, by its being so common, so deeply shared, had provoked him--and as for the impatiences, the hopes, the reiteration of unanswerable questions and the spurts of rumour, he must have been measuring them with a calculating eye. The half-sentence of the announcer's voice coming out of a window at News hour, the flopping rippling headlines of Late Night Final at the newsvendor's corner--what nerve, what nerve in reverse, had they struck on in him? Knowing what he knew, doing what he did. Idly, more idly than all the others doing the same thing, in the streets with her he had thieved the headline out of the corner of his eye, without a break in their talk, with a hiatus in his long pitching step so slight as to be registered by her only through their being arm-in-arm in the falling evening. She now saw his smile as the smile of one who has the laugh. It seemed to her it was Robert who had been the Harrison. "This is some malady of yours," she said. "How dare you say I have been in what you have done? The more I understand it the more I hate it. You're determined, then, to be on the winning side?" "You're thinking of your brothers? Thinking what was good enough for them, honour, ought to be good enough for me? I love your laughing photographs. They were lucky to die before the illusion had broken down--_this__ is not a troubadours' war, Stella. They took what they had with them: they were the finish. But, face it--we're left to go on living in a world which, where all _that's__ concerned, is as dead as the moon. In you there may persist some spark of what's everywhere else gone out: who knows why else I've loved you? Through love you've lit me--don't quarrel now with which way the fire blows. There've never been such winds as there are today, or from such directions." "Roderick may be killed." He said automatically: "I don't expect so." "Oh, then it's to be over as soon as _that__? The end, as soon as _that__?" He looked at the luminous dial of his watch, then said: "I shan't have any part in it--I suppose, now?" "Why do you ask me?" she asked. "I was only wondering." "You and I met the year France fell.--For us here, for everyone here, _what__--if everything goes to plan? By now not, evidently, invasion. So what worse, what instead? What end?" "Who am I to say?" "You say you know what you know." "But that's all I do know.--Where are you going?" She had got out of bed, had drawn up her heavy quilted dressing-gown from the floor and was unsteadily binding it with the cord round her. Without answering, she was groping over the panels of the door: having as an afterthought turned the handle she followed the opening door through into the other room, in which he was not. She switched on a lamp, but then stood recoiling from it, fingers over her eyes. She had then to turn and shut the door behind her, so that lamplight from here should not travel through to the bedroom window Robert had uncurtained. In her infestation by all ideas of delinquency, any offence against the black-out seemed to her punishable by death: it could be the signal for which Harrison had been waiting--posted as he could be, as she pictured him, by some multiplication of his personality, all round the house. Since Robert _was__ what Harrison had said, Harrison must be what he said himself--it was something to be _sure__, she thought, pacing about the room, chafing together the icy palms of her hands. The room had the look of no hour: she contemplated everything in it round her in an insupportable nervous blank-ness of mind. It was as impossible to be away from Robert as to be with him: she came to a stop in front of the photograph. He was right: there could be no family likeness here--her brothers had left no trace. They had been made heroes while things were simple: heroes were the creatures of a simplicity now gone, he said. But had they left _no__ trace--the revulsion in her against his act? The sale of the country.... She looked at this photograph, on this chimney-piece, of the man in the other room, at the black-and-white of what was forever dissolved for her into the features of love--at the same time, they were the mould of what? Twisted inspiration, a sort of recalcitrance in the energy, romanticism fired once too often. The face of a latecomer. He had been right: time makes the only fatal differences of birth. He was right: it was not for her brothers or their sister to judge him. She turned the photograph to the wall, in order to try to picture life without him. At the look of that blank white back of the mount the ice broke; she had to hold on to the chimneypiece while she steadied her body against the beating of her heart--so violent that it seemed to begin again with cruel accumulated force. She tried to say "Robert!" but had no voice. She looked at the door: it was incredible that anyone loved so much should be still behind it. The door opened: he stood against the darkness, in the dressing-gown Roderick had worn. "Yes?" he said--then, when she did not answer: "I thought you called me." They were in each other's arms. If there were any step in the street of sleeping houses, it was impossible it should now be heard by the two blotted out. To anyone silently posted down there in the street, the ranks of windows reflecting the paling sky would have all looked the same; it was in this room that an eyelid came down over the world. Behind their heads the photograph, bent into unaccustomed reverse, at last fell forward, then fell to the floor; but it was some time before Stella started. Her hands slipped from his shoulders slowly down his arms. "I should never have let you come here." "I should have come." "This would be the first place they--" "I should still have come. Last night at Holme Dene I was in terror--terror of never seeing you again. That began to come over me the minute I was in the house; began to come to a head the first time the telephone rang. Till then I'd only known I was in danger: I'd never felt it. Must have been the effect of that house, them? What a place to be taken in, to be taken away from--_theirs__ to be the last faces I saw! I never had pictured arrest before: then all at once I pictured it only that way--it not only seemed the one way it could happen, equally it seemed absolutely impossible it should not happen, because here the scene was, set. My mother had been waiting for this; she wished it! It would be they who had got me into the trap, so that I should never see you again. It never suited them that I should be a man." "Then they noticed?" "I don't know. I gave Anne the jitters." "Anne? But I thought it was late at night." "She came downstairs." "Poor Anne. But when you did get back to London, why didn't you come to me? It would have been no madder last night than this." "How could I? Look what I'd done to Anne. How could I come to you in that state? I wore it off by walking--if I _was__ tailed I gave somebody quite a run, but I don't think so." "All night?" "No; I thought 'Oh, the hell!,' got back I don't know when, slept it out, must have slept it off; because again this morning, having my bath, drinking coffee, shaving, the whole thing looked like a hallucination." "You knew it wasn't; you knew it couldn't be." Robert walked down the room and threw himself on to the sofa on which Roderick had slept. Driving one hand down into the pocket of the dressing-gown, the pocket in which Roderick had found the paper, he dropped back his head and stared at the ceiling. "What I've been doing's not mad," he said, "but it may breed a madness of one kind: you feel secure. Somehow you feel encased. Quite soon danger loses the smell it had for you--you know it's there, but only because you know it must be there. You know it's its business to shift its angle, and you watch; but it does not seem to renew itself or to renew its hold on you, like love does. Before you know what's happened it's an abstraction.--And again, too, when danger's inherent in what one's doing it comes to seem an attribute of one's own--a sort of secret peculiarity one can keep in play. To be a man in secret gets to be like being a sort of celebrity in reverse: being set apart from people becomes familiar.... Yes, of course in theory I've known there _were__ other brains, brains against me--the essential of what I've done has been to have to be careful; and I have been careful. Careful?--the thing has come to be second nature with me: never let up, night or day. I've never been off my guard--have I?" "As far as I know," she said, sitting down on a chair in the middle of the room, "no." "So I thought, And yet at the same time, all this time, it's been becoming more and more inconceivable to me that this _could__ happen.--You'd say, loss of sense of reality? You could be in one way right--I could only do what I've done so intensively that outside it there came to be nothing else--it _could__ be done, is being done, better in other ways; but not by me. To be done as it should, it may be this thing should be done for money--ought they to mistrust the man they don't find it necessary to buy? I acted, _I__ thought I acted, in cold blood--but not, not cold enough, apparently; or it warmed. No fascination, absolute incapacity to _be__ fascinated--that ought to be the test. Yes, and they ought to bar the man who's looking for an answer. Bound to be something rocky about the man who touches a thing like this for its own sake, _his__ own sake. If he were only a danger to himself it wouldn't matter; but it does matter. They'll know another time.... I wonder what I did; what I did not think of. "It could be some other mistake, somewhere. A mistake of one of the others'--you tell me there are the others? Somebody you were seen with." "I ought never to have been seen.--How's Harrison?" "If I had slept with him, _could__ he have kept you out of this?" "What, did he say so? Naturally he would say so. You didn't try?" "I thought I would, last night, but he sent me home." "You left it pretty late," was his comment, abstractedly looking at her. "I couldn't believe him." "Couldn't you?" "I couldn't make up my mind to, till last night. Why _then__ should I? Because last night he accused me of having done what he'd warned me not to, for your sake: spoken to you. Knowing I had, and when, I asked, what made him think so? Oh, he didn't think so, he said; he could be certain. How? From his having watched you do exactly what he had said you'd do, and do instantaneously, if I warned you--give yourself away. Apparently the day after we'd talked you made some specific change in your movements; some change you would only make from momentary loss of nerve. So, to watch you was to see you'd learned you were watched. He volunteered to tell me the night I spoke. So I took him up. He said, the night I got back from Ireland. So then I saw." "I see. He's not so stupid, is he? One might have thought he knew me.--What's _he__ like?" "I have less and less idea." "And gets I wonder what money? Considering, not so much; they none of them get so much; as against which they're on the safer side.--But, again, look, considering what we know--after all, _is__ he worth to them what he does get? He sounds to me crazy, riding for a fall. I mean to say, coming to you like that. What a chance to take! What was to stop you turning the story in?" "He knew me, too, I imagine." "Still, you conceivably might have, which would have been the end of _him__." "Yes; but he told me that would be the end of you." "Any cigarettes in here?" he said abruptly. "I left mine on your bed." She got up to look unexpectantly in the box: usually she kept no cigarettes in it, but tonight a packet of Players was wedged inside--she could only think the Players must have been left behind by Harrison when he came to call for her, and stowed in here by the charwoman next morning. Having shaken the packet to make certain it was not a deception, she brought the spoils to the sofa: Robert lit one for her, one for himself. They inhaled, looking at one another calmly, and said nothing. Extended at full length, narrow and Byzantine in the dressing-gown, he let one hand fall on her knee as she sat on the sofa by him. Once he rolled his head round in the direction of the curtained window overlooking the street; however, nothing gave any sign. "What is it you are, then," she said at last, "a revolutionary? No, counter-revolutionary? You think revolutions are coming down in the world? Once, they used to seem an advance, each time--you think _not__ that, any more, now? After each, first the loss of what had been gained, then the loss of more? So that now revolution coming could only be the greatest convulsion so far, with the least meaning of all? Yet nobody can rid themselves of the idea that _something's__ coming. What is this present state of the world, then--a false pregnancy?" "No." "No, I see you couldn't think that, or you wouldn't have... You know, Robert, for anybody _doing__ anything so definite, you talk vaguely. Wildness and images. That may have been my bringing my feeling in. But to me it's as though there still were something you'd never formulated." "This is the first time I've ever talked." "Never talked to the others--the others you're in this with?" "You imagine we meet to swap ideas?" "But then in that case, all the more you've thought." "All the more I've thought. More and more the outcome of thinking because you never can talk is never _to__ talk. The thing isolating you isolates itself. It sets up a tension you hope may somehow break itself, but that you can't break. You don't know where thought began; it goes round in circles. _Talk__ has got to begin--_where__? How am I to know how to talk, after so much thought? Any first time, is one much good? Unformulated--what was?" "I don't know. Or perhaps, missing?" "How am I to know what's missing in my own thought? I'm committed to it. What did you want, then--brass tacks?" She did not seem certain, half shook her head, but then amended: "Though they are always something." Embarrassed by the navety of the question, she said: "You are out for the enemy to win because you think they have something? What?" "They have something. This war's just so much bloody quibbling about something that's predecided itself. Either side's winning would stop the war; only their side's winning would stop the quibbling. I want the cackle cut.--Well, what have I still not said?" "I still don't know," she said, taking the burned-down stump of the cigarette from between his fingers. "Never mind." "Never mind then, sweetheart." "I wish we could sleep," she said. "_What__ is Harrison doing?" Robert suddenly said, in the tone of somebody asking something he probably did or should know but had forgotten. "What's he meaning to do? Just now you said something: say that again. In the end, what is he out after--nothing but to make you? I can't get him." "He cannot see why everything should not be arranged; it seems to him a fair deal, and he's obsessed by it--or was. As to what he does expect to get out of it I can't think. He says he knows what he wants; I suppose he wants what he doesn't know. He likes it here," she added, looking round her at the extinct pretty room. "Likes the ashtrays, for instance: he's always fingering things. That may be it, really: he wants to live here." "Live with you?" "Live here with me. The uneasier he is the happier he is. He cannot see any objections, or see how I can. And yes, there's more than that--he's convinced I am really doing you a mean, bad turn by saying 'no' to him, or at any rate by not saying 'yes.' He has quite a feeling for you." "That could be, I suppose." "He has you at heart--it's inconceivable to him that a man wouldn't rather have his immunity--a clean sheet to get on with what he wants to--than any woman. How can I not sometimes ask myself if he mayn't be right? At the same time, look at the contradiction--by his showing, he's continually trading in his own safety for the purpose of getting me.... Tonight I see, I _should__ have taken a chance on it. But that that was to have to mean, outright, the end of you and me he did from the outset make quite brutally clear. If I had been certain, if I had been certain! Last night, when I _was__ certain, I... But then, he turned round and sent me home." "I wish we knew why. What was in the wind?" "I had hurt his feelings." "Nonsense. He must have had something else to do." She was silent. "Sent you home from where?" he said, searchingly looking at her. "Where had you got to with him? Where were you?" "I don't _know__, Robert," she cried, distractedly slipping down from the sofa to kneel beside it. "I forgot to ask. It might have been anywhere; even a girl we met there thought she was somewhere else. I'd been rattled from the beginning of the evening by Roderick's suddenly ringing up; but if I'd had any idea what Harrison was going to come out with I'd have kept my head; I can keep my head.--As it was, what do you imagine I came back here to, after he'd sent me home? I lay all night wondering what he had meant to do, what he might or might not have done if I'd been different, what he'd be doing next. Not knowing whether he ever really had meant to stop things taking their course, not knowing whether that had ever, really, been in his power. Wondering whether that had once been in his power, when first he put the thing up to me, but now no longer was. Asking myself what really he _had__ been up to, these last two months, and whether my always keeping on hedging, stalling, had made him angrier than he'd shown. Whether his having thrown me back in my own face meant he had, all at once, out of anger, decided to let things ride. Whether what Harrison had decided or not decided did matter, ever had mattered, really? Whether, knowing last night that things _were__ taking their course, outside his control, his idea was to save his face? The fascination for him in this thing with me could have been so much less me than himself, his own all-powerfulness--a one-sided love's unnatural: there must be vice in it somewhere. If so, he would see my 'yes,' at _that__ point, only in one way: my having called his bluff. Not that he might jib at breaking a bargain--me his: a new lease of safety for you--but, what value could I have left for him once he'd watched me see he _couldn't__ do what he'd said? Very little, odiously little, none.... But then I went all the way back again: I _had__ hurt his feelings. If you can't conceive those you can't conceive what he is. In the end that's what makes him a dangerous man." Twisting round on the carpet beside the sofa, doubling into the bulky quilted folds of her dressing-gown, Stella buried her face in the cushions stacked under Robert's head. He, in the gathered stillness of someone resolved to move in a moment more, lay a moment longer staring up at the ceiling. She, in a muffled voice, ended up: "So you see, I've no idea how we left it." "What?--can't hear you." She repeated: "I've no idea how we left it." The expression on those lips of hers was familiar--its many contexts, vagrant, social, so very much not mattering, had become too many for him to count. It had come as the end, or rather the fading-out, of so many stories at the end of so many days; or, as a sort of confession as to why many stories, now that she came to tell them, had no ending. So much had had to be left in the air, so often, that her manner of saying so, every time, always had the same intonation--of fatalism, of fleeting but true regret. She had been given the slip once more. "I've no idea how we left it." Ineffectual little expression, blent of boredom and chagrin, it had become conventional; but, at the same time, a sort of convention or shorthand of lovers' talk, stamped with a temperament and endeared by usage. She had said this so many times: again it was said tonight--and the monstrous, life-and-death disproportion between tonight's context and all that host of others did not, could not, stand out as it should. She did not sound, so could not seem to be feeling, very much more inadequate than she ever had felt. Which was enough to make Robert laugh. He laughed as it would have been possible to weep, thrown round towards her on an elbow driven into glissading cushions. It was a laughter of the entire being, racking as it was irregular in its intakes upon his body, making his face a mask of shut eyes and twisting lips, convulsing the rest of him in a sort of harmony of despair at the situation and joy in her. The sofa shook--she clung to its scrolled end as though in a high gale. "Why?" she cried, "what is the matter--what?" Not letting go of the sofa, she put out her other hand; which he, by immediately catching at and holding by its wrist to his breast, used to establish a sort of circuit for the joke or agony. She under this compulsion began to laugh too, though rebelliously, with bewilderment and uncertainty: it was only by laying her cheek to his, as though either to extinguish the laughter by sheer weight or draw out of him into her its unholy cause, that she comprehended. She then had to laugh entirely. "I see," she admitted, drawing a sob of breath, "I see how it sounded. But that _was__ how it was." At once the laughter left him. "What a position I've put you in, all the same!" He sprang up from the sofa--"Anyway, I must dress!" "Going?" she said dully. "But there might be someone outside the door. We must think of that." "I have been thinking of that. There has been a step." She, tracing back by touch her one white lock of hair, said: "When has there been a step?" "Every now and then." "Every now and then?" She went to the nearer window, to stand, white face to the white curtain, arguing: "I didn't hear. And if it had been _his__ step I should have heard it; in fact, I should have known it before I heard it. I wonder..." "Stella! Don't touch the curtain!" "I wasn't going to--was I?" "I thought you were." "I wanted to. Wanted to crash the window open and blaze the lights on. To think of him makes me angry--I wanted to say, 'Yes, here we are, together: what else do you suppose?' " "If he is down there, that's why he _is__ down there. Imagine it's being gay for him, with his thoughts?" "It's we who must think," she said, turning from the window. "Think away," said Robert, shrugging his shoulders. His clothes were over a chair; already he was beginning to dress quickly: she remained, arms folded, leaning against a corner of the chimneypiece, intently blindly watching him, saying, "I could always let you out at the back, down through the basement into the yard. There would be walls round that, but would they be such high walls? There would be the caretakers, but they would be asleep." "If there's somebody at the front there could be somebody at the back," he said, dressing so mechanically that he seemed indifferent. "No; that could depend on _who__ the somebody at the front is. Whether it's Harrison or not." "Why?" "He's in love: I live here. He could have followed you here. He could be watching the house for his own reasons: people torment themselves." "That doesn't alter the fact that he's what he is." "What is anyone? Mad, divided, undoing what they do. You were mad to come here. I told you on the telephone, as plainly as I dared to word it, not to--not on any account." "But you expected me." "I was waiting for you somehow to get in touch with me, to say where else to meet. We could have met somewhere else." "If I _am__ tailed, what matter where I go? Somewhere else--where else? Some street corner?" "We could have talked." "Yes, we could have talked. But what do you suppose I thought in my mother's house?--that I'd never be in your arms again. What do you suppose I had to make sure of? That. That, then to tell you. Because yes, that too I saw, in my mother's house--you left to wonder, to hear, to not believe, to have to believe, to never know why. So, to tell you. I came here to tell you, even if you had not asked. Why not the telling first? How was I to know that might not lose me the other? Better the last of a love in ignorance than no love, no love in knowledge." "But there could have been that." "Yes? Tonight, yes. But there may be a thing that's too much to go on knowing. A thing not meant to be known--too much to live with, to love in the face of, under the everlasting weight of. How do we know we haven't both known this was that? Dared we ever have come to the point of breaking silence if we had not known this was goodbye? Better to say goodbye at the beginning of the hour we never have had, then it will have no end--best of all, Stella, if you can come to remember what never happened, to live most in the one hour we never had.--Because now I must go," he added, dressed, looking quickly round him to make sure he had forgotten nothing. She recollected one thing, picked up his dressing-gown and gave him his lighter out of the pocket. He corrected himself--"Or, try to go. I do want to make it, I want to make it--my ideas, you know, are too good to be merely died for: they want life.--Did you once say there was a way out on to the roofs?" "Yes, the landing skylight; it's been trapdoored over since I've been in the flat, but they showed me how I could get out that way if I were cut off by a fire, or to put out incendiaries. There's that ladder that lets down on a pulley. Oh Robert, you must have seen it every night!" "Show me." "But--" she began unbearably. "Very well, what?" he cried, wheeling round. "What do we know for certain? He may have kept his mouth shut. None of this may be true." "Then no harm's done: what a laugh on the roof! Either this is nothing or it's the pay-off. I don't think it's nothing--you _were__ right, I had no business to come: I should have thought of you. What else should it be but this? My time's run right out; I'm watched and they know I'm wise: you know that better than I do--use your reason. Think as much as you like, but for God's sake let me get out of here while it's still dark.--Do _you__ want me taken?" "Then they'd think of everything we could think of?" "Yes, that would be up to them. Why?" "Then there could be somebody on the roof." "There's one great thing about a roof; there's one way off it." She stood for two or three seconds, then said: "The roofs steep. I wish you hadn't got your stiff knee." "I wish I hadn't had my stiff knee. We've never danced, for instance.... If by any chance this did have to finish that way, you wouldn't have wanted anything else for me, would you? You'd know if it came to that there could only have been one other thing, the alternative?" "Having to face it out..." "I could. Should I? Would you be ashamed of me? Not while I was not ashamed of myself.... But what a stink, though, Stella--think, Stella: what a stink for you all!" "Terrible for Ernestine," she said, turning away her face, thinking, it is the awful ones who are the little ones one must not offend. "There may not be anyone on the roof: it's fifty-fifty. I still somehow think I'll make it. I want to go by the roof." "Where are you expecting to get down again?" she said, with a light sudden curious release of her natural voice. He repeated: "I want to go by the roof--I don't want to run out; I want you to send me off." "Gome on, then," she said, in no more time than it took to draw the breath, "we'll let down the ladder." They went hurriedly out through the little hall of the flat, turned on the landing light overhanging the shaft of staircase and began to unwind from its staple the pulley-rope of the ladder, which from its hinge under the blinded skylight came down towards them slowly. Robert looked up it: "Now we'll soon see," he said. He went up it at the most eager speed compatible with the unequal action of the stiff knee, then heaved with his shoulder against the skylight, which gave: he came down again far enough to kiss her. "Take care of yourself," he hurriedly said. "Now turn off the light and get back into the flat and shut the door." She turned off the. light. "Goodnight," she said in the dark. "Goodnight." She went back into the flat and shut the door. In the street below, not so much a step as the semi-stumble of someone after long standing shifting his position could be, for the first time by her, heard.
Chapter 16
THAT day whose start in darkness covered Robert's fall or leap from the roof had not yet fully broken when news broke: the Allied landings in North Africa. Talk was of nothing else. Nor had the quickening subsided when Montgomery's Order of the Day to the Eighth Army--"We have completely smashed the German and Italian armies"--became the order of yet another day for London. There came the Sunday set for victorious bell-ringing: throughout the country every steeple was to break silence. When at last it came, the bells' sound was not as strange or momentous as had been expected: after everything these were still the bells of the former time, climbing, striving, searching round in the air in vain for some still not to be found new note. All that stood out in cities were unreverberating lacunae where there were churches gone. At the beginning, the invitation to rejoice brought out a few people into the sunless November morning streets, as though the peals and crashes were a spectacle to be watched passing: eyes for a moment seemed to perceive a peculiar brightness. Soon, however, even before the bells had come to a climax, people began turning away from the illusion, either because it had already begun to fade or because they knew it must. There was a movement indoors again: doors and windows shut. Louie had anticipated the bells in heart ever since she heard they were to be rung; but when it came to their hour they rang false--she heard them dry-eyed; she should have been hearing the bells of home, the bells from Seale hill over the open marsh and sea. Connie, early that morning, had intercepted the Sunday papers on her way out to the post, therefore no other directive for feeling was to be found--Louie sought refuge in the streets, looking in this and that direction in hopes of a crowd moving any one way. This led her to nothing better than isolation, ever more at a loss, on an island in the middle of Marylebone Road. Then it was that she decided to view in daylight the street in which she had said goodnight to Stella--there, she could be certain, _someone__ in London lived. She bent her steps that way not knowing exactly with what in mind. But to enter Weymouth Street was to quail at the unspeakingness of its expensive length. She had had no notion that Mrs. Rodney lived so far from her; and, worse, it was impossible to be certain at the foot of which of those flights of steps they had said goodbye--for goodbye, and nothing but that, she now saw it was. The chattering variation of the architecture, from house to house, itself seemed to cheat and mock her--she looked at Dutch-type gables, bronze-grilled doors, leaded casements, gothic projecting bays, balconies, discrepantly high parapets, outwitted. Outwitted, but only just--for, anything ever to _be__ remembered here would be never, never to be forgotten. One unity, this morning, the empty Sunday street had, up and down its length--the sunless toneless reverberation, from planes of distance, of the victory bells. _That__ could but be being heard--from behind which window out of this host of windows?--by Mrs. Rodney. Louie stood still to listen again, in company. She stood face up, one hand instinctively grasping one of the spearheads of railings topping an area, as though to bridge, forever, in some memory of the body's, the sound and scene. But then instantaneously she was struck, pierced, driven forward into a stumbling run by anguish--_an__ anguish, striking out of the air. She looked round her vainly, blindly, for her assailant. Flee?--no, she was clutched, compelled, forbidden to leave the spot. She remained pacing to and fro, to and fro, like a last searcher for somebody said to be still alive, till the bells stopped. The street had again been empty for some hours when Stella came out of a door and down steps not far from where Louie had stood. This was the afternoon she had promised to visit Roderick, and there appeared no reason to change the plan. She made her way across London to the right station and took the right train. It was a slow tram, one-class, made up of old stock, departing from a remote platform, crowded out of the way of anything more important on to a bye line, even so halting diffidently between its many stops. Sunday short-distance travellers getting in and out, in and out of the carriage in which sat Stella found themselves being eyed with a sort of frozen attention by the woman in the corner: they shared an uneasy feeling that she was for some reason trying to learn their faces. She seemed to be someone for the first time finding herself alone among humanity. At the same time, the conveyance of that look of hers from one to another face was to be taken as the one sign of life: otherwise this person sat like an image, upright against the grime-impregnated tapestry of the compartment, dead gloved hands crossed in her lap, palms up. There were moments, between its being a look at faces, when the look became not a look at all; but then invariably, as though in recoil from its own abeyance, it would turn to the window, taking the head with it. This was always so at the many unaccountable, meaninglessly fateful stops between the stations: sometimes there was to be found nothing more speaking than embankments of bleached, soiled, already wintry grass; but sometimes Stella was fortunate in being able to see through railings or over fences not only yards and gardens but right into back windows of homes. Prominent sculleries, with bent-forward heads of women back at the sink again after Sunday dinner, and recessive living-rooms in which the breadwinner armchair-slumbered, legs out, hand across the eyes, displayed themselves; upstairs, at looking-glasses in windows, girls got themselves ready to go out with boys. One old unneeded woman, relegated all day to where she slept and would die, prised apart lace curtains to take a look at the train, as though calculating whether it might not be possible to escape this time. Children turned out to play went through with the mime of it, dragging objects or pushing one another up and down short paths where vegetables had not been able to be sown. It was striking how listlessly, shiftlessly and frankly life in these houses--and what else was life but this?--exposed itself to the eyes in the passing or halting trains: eyes to be taken, one could only suppose, to be blinded by other preoccupations. It was not to be taken into account that from any one train there should be looking any one pair of eyes which had no other preoccupation, no other resort, nothing; eyes themselves exposed forever to what they saw, subjected to whatever chose to be seen. Though she had many times made this journey, she did not seem to know how soon, at what point along the line, she should be beginning to be expecting to get out: she was therefore forced to listen intently each time the name of a station was being called. Someone in the carriage remarked that if bells could be rung again he did not see why names should not be written up--who were we hiding from now? it was a disgrace. In the end, Stella only was made to realise she _was__ arriving by the sight of Roderick, accompanied by the still taller Fred, on the platform: her carriage ran past them slowly and they saw her. Fred, with a nod to Roderick, thereupon made off quickly. The train stopped; Stella got out and was kissed by her son. "Where's Fred gone?" she asked. "He only came to the station." Roderick continued to hold her arm as they walked down the platform. "I'm so glad you came," he said. "I wondered whether you would. It's very good of you, Mother." "Why, because Robert's dead?" she asked, showing her ticket at the barrier. "Perhaps it is better for you having something to do. I had been wondering what you'd most rather _I__ did. I decided I'd leave it and see if you came today; but then, if not, somehow to get to London to you. I was anxious about you. What I'd have liked best, when I heard, would have been to go to you there at once. _Would__ you have liked that? Only not knowing what you would really like stopped me. Because a man always does get off comparatively light when he beats it off home because of some bad news; though of course what they invariably do say is, why on earth instead of losing his head and taking the law into his own hands didn't he apply for compassionate leave, which would under the circumstances almost certainly have been granted." "Darling Roderick... I don't think it would have been granted under these circumstances." "I know how I could have put it; in fact I was going to put it that way if it came to the point--I should have put it that you and Robert were engaged. Because you easily could have been, I should think.--_Would__ you have liked me to?" "No," she said, shaking her head but wearing the smile suddenly granted her by his love. "For one thing, I should have been out at work; one cannot stay away if one's not ill. And, no. No, there would have been nothing for you to do." "Was there anything for you to do, Mother?" "No, nothing. No, as far as I remember there wasn't anything." "I was so afraid that... Nobody came and bothered you?" She opened her handbag, took out her handkerchief, touched her lips with it. After which, "Where shall we go?" she said. "Yes, that's what I've been wondering." Roderick looked about at what was outside the station, which did not so far offer any solution. "How would it be if we simply went to the cafe and sat down quietly? It isn't exactly time for tea yet, but we've been there so often that I don't suppose they'd mind us just sitting down, especially as I imagine almost nobody else will be wanting to sit there till it _is__ teatime." "No, let's walk first," she said. She guided Roderick's look in direction of the asphalt field-path she had seen in her mind's eye while she was still with Robert. "Let's walk that way." The path obliquely ran across exhausted grassland offered for building: the offer remained open; the board was down--that there _was__ to be building here you could never doubt. This that met the eye was the merest ghostly lingering of a landscape, gone by now if it had not been for the war. The recalcitrant swell of earth which had cracked the path would present not more than a moment's difficulty to the sinkers of foundations, however shallow. Meanwhile, the path led, ahead of the walkers, in the direction of a thin line of poplars, beyond which, one seemed to remember, was a foot-bridged brook. For some reason, because she thought of the path _as__ running, she envisaged all else as standing still; so it was with surprise that, from halfway across the bridge, she saw motion, more fateful for being slow, in the disks of scum and the shreds of froth on the clayey water below her. Pausing to rest her hands on the rail, she wondered what the hazards of navigation would be for a paper boat, was passed through by an impulse to fold and launch one, recollected that there was now nothing for which the boat's fortune could be an augury, but all the same turned to Roderick with her lips apart, reassembling her sharing of his childhood in her glance. But for Roderick, on the bridge beside her, this moment had a quite different sense--some sort of assuagement or satisfaction at her having rested even so much of her as her hands, for however short a time, on even this bar of unknowing wood. His pity, speaking to her out of the stillness of his face, put her in awe of him, as of a greater sufferer than herself--no pity is ignorant, which is pity's cost. She perceived him as knowing in whole the sorrow of which she, still, knew less than her little part. More than Robert's death was there in Roderick's face; the world weighed down for this instant upon this single soul. She shrank from her son as might an unavailing friend--she set herself to counting the disks of foam being sucked from sight slowly under the bridge. She asked: "You heard the bells, here, this morning?" "I don't think so; I don't know where bells are, here. Fred mentioned yesterday evening that there was some rumour that they'd got to be rung; he said in that case they would be something completely new to his sister's baby.--You didn't mind Fred's coming to the station? He said he would like to, as a mark of respect." "You and Fred haven't looked at the Sunday papers?" "No. I don't think so. Why?" Stella did not answer. "I naturally," Roderick went on, "told Fred something, but not what it was exactly. I think he thinks there's been somebody killed in battle." "Well, there has been.--Roderick, I said I would come today because you wanted me to tell you about your father." "Yes. Still, I don't think we need talk about him today, now." "Just as you like; but I do not mind what I talk about. If anything, I should rather like to tell you the story now that I am beginning to understand it." "Just as you like, Mother; anything you'd like,--but today _I'd__ rather not talk about my father." He restlessly turned away his head, looking along the shabby continuation of the path; he struck the bridge rail with an authoratively childish gesture of dismissal--making the vibration jump through her hands. "_He__ really is dead," he said. "After all, it was Cousin Francis who's given me my house; and with you I can only connect Robert. Cousin Nettie's bringing my father out like that may have just shown how determined she is to be mad. How is one even to know he'd have wanted that? How am I even to know he was my father? He went away." "Very well then, Roderick; then let's leave that story." "Wisteria Lodge is really the only place for anybody knowing so much that does not matter. It was stupid of me to mix myself up with that. I've kicked myself," he said sadly, "for ringing you up like that--but how could I know what was just going to happen?" "Very well then, Roderick." "Mother?" he said suddenly. "Yes?" "Do you really not mind what we talk about?" "No. No." "What _was__ Robert doing on the roof?" Once more she touched her lips with her handkerchief--a timid widowed habit which had come out in her only that afternoon: the white cambric bore a series of little pink-red smudges, each fainter; now there was almost no more lipstick left to come off. She then put her arm through Roderick's, as a sign of agreement that, yes, it would be better to leave the bridge. They turned, by the same kind of unspoken agreement, back, retracing the first few of their steps in silence, hearing Sunday afternoon wireless coming across the wasteland from a bungalow. It would have been easy to recline, to become suffused by indifference, to be thankful that all was over--but it was not, yet; the rest was not yet ready to be silence. By delaying her answer she would be giving her answer too much weight. "That seemed his best way out of my flat," she said. "He was expecting to be arrested at any minute." "Oh. Why was he? _Could__ he have been arrested?" "Yes, he could have been arrested as a traitor." Roderick, turning to her with knitted brows, pondered; then said: "But was he going to be?" "That night? I don't actually know. That was what he thought." "But why _should__ they arrest him as a--as what you said?" "Because it had all been proved," she said, remorselessly turning to study her son's face. "Oh," said Roderick formally. Changing colour slowly with amazement he added: "Yes, I see. " They walked till they were out of hearing of the wireless music, she crumpling her handkerchief absently in her hand. "He must have been pretty brave?" he queried, looking at her for confirmation. "The other way round, he might have got a V. G., quite likely?... In a way, I rather wish I had known." She said nothing. "Because I never have known anybody like that.... He was on the other side in this war?" "Yes." "He never did seem to me to be living anywhere very particular," said Roderick. "You don't think if you had married him it would have given him more of a stake in the country?" She uttered a sound not unlike a laugh. A party of girls and soldiers swinging in loose formation along the path towards them could but stare: Roderick, head up, cheeks red still, outfaced the party until it had divided, swerved off left and right on to the grass and been left behind. Then: "I suppose," he went on, "everything I try saying must sound ridiculous--no, must _be__ ridiculous? You see, really I haven't got anything that I _can__ say. I am so sorry, Mother; because there must be something." "No, I don't think there is. In which case, I had no right to tell you. One has no right to tell anybody anything as to which there's nothing to be said: Robert felt that. But you did ask me why he was on the roof." "Perhaps I should not have asked? It was what I wanted to know." "No, I'm glad you asked.--Because of course there is something to be said. There must be. There's _something__ to be said." "I know," said Roderick, knitting his brows again. "But by me? Why me? After all, who am I?" "The only person I can tell." Having come to the end of the path, back again to the point where it branched from the bye-road to the station, they halted. Stella looked across at the agglomeration of buildings which somehow made up this town or village, having no other character than that of being near Roderick's camp. "I cannot help expecting something from you: I must." She left it at that, she thought, as one was free to leave any helpless remark. Roderick, however, drew a deep anxious breath, at the same time disengaging his arm from hers. "I wish I were God," he said. "Instead of which I am so awfully young--that's my disadvantage. The only hope would have been my having happened to say some inspired thing, but now there hasn't been that I shall be no good for about another fifty years--because all I can do now is try and work this out, which could easily take my lifetime; and by that time you'd be dead. I couldn't bear to think of you waiting on and on and on for something, something that in a flash would give what Robert did and what happened enormous meaning like there is in a play of Shakespeare's--but, must you? If there's something that _is__ to be said, won't it say itself? Or mayn't you come to imagine it has been said, even without your knowing what exactly it was?... Or are you telling me, then asking me, because I _am__ young, and so ought to last on later into time? You want me to be posterity? But then, Robert's dying of what he did will not always be there, won't last like a book or picture: by the time one is able to understand it it will be gone, it just won't be there to be judged. Because, I suppose art is the only thing that can go on mattering once it has stopped hurting?... Mother, today I would say anything to comfort you; I do wish I had enough experience--if I could even only see the thing as a whole, like God!... As it is, I expect really you know what is best yourself." "I expect I do; I know I ought to; I must.--But the thing was, you were an outside person." "You do really think I am a person?" asked Roderick. They walked down the bye-road into the main street, turning in the direction of the caf.
Chapter 17
THERE can occur in lives a subsidence of the under soil--so that, without the surface having been visibly broken, gradients alter, uprights cant a little out of the straight. A group of persons, of souls--perhaps not conscious, till now, of so much as being in the same neighbourhood--may thus be affected by one happening. In this case, few outward changes followed on Robert's end--Stella moved across London into another flat, off Victoria Street; Harrison vanished from London; as against which Mrs. Kelway and Ernestine refused the offer for Holme Dene and stayed where they were. Roderick, having bestirred himself, obtained his commission in the autumn of 1943. Always working away at the same small factory, Louie lived on at Chilcombe Street under the surveyance of Connie--who, as Civil Defence, found herself returned to the foreground by the renewal of enemy air attacks on London early in 1944. Internally, tensions shifted. After the night climax in Weymouth Street, Harrison made no move to contact Stella, and she did not know how to contact him: their extraordinary relationship having ended in mid air, she found she missed it--Harrison became the one living person she would have given anything to see. Ultimately, it was _his__ silent absence which left her with absolutely nothing. She never, then, _was__ to know what had happened? For, with regard to Robert the silence from behind the scenes never broke: what was most to be noted about his death was its expediency--the country was spared a demoralising story; everything now could be, and was, hushed up. His death remained, officially, what the coroner found it--misadventure, outcome of a crazy midnight escapade on a roof; to which identification, in the popular mind, of any part of London W. I. with "Mayfair" gave colour, odour, scandalous likeliness. From Stella, as the woman friend in the luxury flat, was extracted the cogent parts of the inquest evidence. Having replied to questions as to the position of the ladder, the skylight, etc., she answered others. "He was determined to leave by the roof," she stated. "He had the idea that someone he did not name to me had followed us and was in the street waiting to make trouble.... I imagine that either he did not wish to give the person the satisfaction of an interview, or that he thought a quarrel outside my door might make embarrassments for me.... Yes, I have other men friends, I suppose.... I beg your pardon; I mean yes, I have other men friends.... No, there had never been any incident of that kind.... No, I cannot tell you whom Captain Kelway may have had in mind: I have no idea. It might have been someone who had been trying to pick a quarrel with him for some other reason.... No, I cannot suggest any other reason, but one never knows.... For two years.--Two years and two months: we met in September 1940.... Yes, we saw one another frequently.... Yes, I have always tried to keep some drink in my flat, never to run quite out of it: one needs it.... Yes, naturally,--I beg your pardon, I mean yes.... No, never heavily.... I'm afraid I cannot say; I have no idea how much other people do drink.... No, I don't think I remember any quarrels.... No, not that night more than any other.... We were talking about the war.... Late? I suppose it was; I suppose we did not notice how time was passing; the war is a very interesting subject.... Yes, I did notice that Captain Kelway was in an excitable state. Possibly that was because we had been talking about the war; he had been taken off the active service list since Dunkirk.... I cannot say, I'm afraid; I did not notice.... No, I do not remember drinking more heavily than usual.... As far as I know, absolutely clear: I remember everything.... Is it unusual? I have a good memory.... Off and on: I should say that the idea of there being somebody in the street outside gained on him as the evening went on.... As the night went on, then.... Yes, I suggested I should go down and see, but he would not let me.... I cannot say. He had never struck me as being subject to hallucinations or delusions at any other time.... There may or may not have been: I have no idea. All I can say is, there was nobody in the street when I went down later--unless you count his body.... No, I had not heard anything: I simply went down.... I went down and opened the street door.... I say, I simply went down. No, nothing made me: I simply thought I would go downstairs and look out of the door. I don't know why: why does one do anything?... I beg your pardon.... No, I don't know how long after: I didn't look at the clock. Two minutes, five minutes, ten minutes: I don't know.... Before that? Simply waiting about.... No, not for anything in particular.... Very well, then I was not waiting. When he had gone I was simply there in the room.... Yes, of course I knew he was doing a dangerous thing. For a man with a stiff knee it was a particularly dangerous thing to do.... On the contrary: I made every attempt to stop him.... Yes; but what could I do?... I've already said so--I have already described him as being in an excitable state.... No other occasion in particular; but I suppose everybody is in an excitable state sometimes?... By excitable state I mean that he was not taking anything else into consideration.... The darkness, the steepness of the roofs, the different heights of the houses, and, as I have said, his knee.... No, I cannot remember whether he was carrying an electric torch: he did not usually.... Yes, I'm sorry; I agree that that is important. I must withdraw my statement that I remember everything.... "When I found him? What did I think had happened? What I still think--that he had lost his footing.... Yes, I should describe myself as agitated. "Yes, since 1940, September 1940.... As much as one comes to know about the circumstances of a friend's life in two years, I suppose.... I am not clear what you mean by 'matters of a confidential nature.' Naturally we did not discuss his work: I did not expect that.... Not secretive about his personal affairs, no. He did not give me the impression of having anything to hide.... No, I should not have thought him likely to have enemies; he was not quarrelsome.... I agree: it does seem strange. I have no idea why. No, he did not explain. He simply said there was somebody at the door.... No, he was not exhibiting signs of fear. I imagine that where he was concerned he would have preferred to go down and settle the matter, but that he did not want to make scenes and trouble at that late hour outside my house.... Of course; that would have been best, but it did not occur to him.... I cannot remember whether it occurred to me. There was no reason why he should not have remained quietly in my flat until whoever it was, or whoever he thought it was, had gone. I can only say that he did not wish to.... Possibly. Any argument is agitating.... Only in so far as I was trying to argue him out of what he was doing. It was not a quarrel.... Yes, I should agree in calling it the decision of a man in an excitable state.... No, never. Captain Kelway's behaviour never at any time struck me as abnormal. That night it could have been called abnormal in being unlike itself. Normally he would have been the last person to do an ill-judged thing.... "Yes, for some months. In fact he had not long been out of hospital when I met him.... Only for his knee. No, there had been no question of psychiatric treatment.... I noticed nothing. I suppose one cannot say what might be the delayed effects of strain or shock.... No, he gave me no reason to think he had money troubles.... I've already said, he never gave me the impression of having anything of any Kind on his mind.... I don't quite understand that question--am I to take it you want to know whether I think he went out on to the roof with the intention of taking his own life?... I'm sorry: I thought that was what you did mean.... I do not know what his intentions were. He may have hoped to find a fire escape down the back of one of the other houses; he may have expected to be able to open the skylight of another house and make his way down through that house, and so out.... I should say he regarded the whole thing as a good idea, a joke, and a way of outwitting the person trying to make trouble.... Very well: the person he imagined to be there trying to make trouble.... No, I did not. I have already told you that I did not.... When he had gone, I remained in my flat till I went downstairs. I went downstairs, opened the door, went out into the street. I then saw he had fallen.... I cannot remember.... Thank you." She left the coroner's court with one kind of reputation, that of being a good witness. The afternoon of the Sunday of the bell-ringing had been devoted by Louie to an exhaustive reading of the Sunday papers--tossed in at her door by Connie, the worse for wear, on the latter's way up to the top of the house to sleep. One paper gave a short report of the inquest; two others, however, featured extensive pieces on it. Louie saw Stella's name, re-read her address, and received, in an unbearable flash, the import of that street in which _she__ had that morning stood. For a moment she wondered whether it might not be Harrison who had fallen, under another name. The ill-fated officer's behaviour, as emerging from the accounts here, seemed to her in its rabid suspiciousness, its unloving ruthlessness and its queerness, to have been that of Harrison exactly--so much so that Louie toured every sensation that, in her, surrounded Harrison's being dead. Its being imperative to pity the dead made her recollect his fruitless frenzy of thought, all alone at the concert that first day. Again she took up the paper--no, but Harrison had _not__ a stiff knee! No, every joint of his flexed with an uninteresting smoothness: the side-slip or jerk or jamming was in his manner--which was, she saw, as hastily she returned him to life, chronic. No, he limped no more than he had ever loved. She could not forget the calculated padding un-eager evenness of his walk that evening, after he and she left the concert. It was that bodily monotony of him which, coupled with his recalcitrance, could not but get on any woman's nerves. All the same, she could not break some connection between the man one night sitting at the table and the man the next night falling from the roof. For Louie, subsidence came about through her now knowing Stella not to be virtuous. Virtue became less possible now it was shown impossible by Stella, less to be desired because Stella had not desired it enough. Why Louie should have attached her own floating wish to a face watched for an hour cannot be said: there must be faces which attract aspiration just as others focus sensuous dreams--what else had happened originally in the case of Harrison? Louie had felt herself to be in a presence. For her, therefore, now it was Stella who had fallen into the street. It was the blanks in Louie's vocabulary which operated inwardly on her soul; most strongly she felt the undertow of what she could not name. Humble and ambiguous, she was as unable to name virtue as she had been, until that sudden view of Harrison's companion, to envisage it. Two words she _had__, "refinement," "respectability," were for her somewhere on the periphery. In search of what should make for completeness and cast out fear she indistinctly saw virtue as the inverse of sex: at the same time, somehow, it had distress, of one kind or another, as its sublime prerogative.--Had not Louie herself felt a distress in Stella, owing to Harrison? Now she looked back she saw, yes, there _had__ also been fear, nay, terror--but, the qualitative pureness of the terror had made it seem to her pure morally. During their dark walk home Stella _had__ given the impression of being a soul astray--but how, it had seemed for the period of illusion, should she not be? What, indeed, was there for her? She could not but be out of her sphere here, nonplussed, a wanderer from some better star. It had been much to find in the world one creature too good for the world. She had not been too good. Here, and not in one paper only, was where it said about her, the bottles, the lover, the luxury West End flat. She had had other men friends; there nearly had been a fight. It all only came to a matter of expensiveness; there was no refinement. A nicer look and a nicer voice, but there she was with someone she was not married to--who had he not run out on the roof, tight, would be still there. She had seemed so respectable--respectable as one of those lost Seale faces--but there she had stood in court, telling them all. That was that; simply that again. There was nobody to admire: there _was__ no alternative. No unextinguished watch-light remained, after all, burning in any window, however far away. In hopes of what, then, was one led on, led on? How long, looking back on it, it had lasted--that dogged, timid, unfaithfully-followed hope! The November Sunday faded, as it had begun, in mist--Louie came over gooseflesh, scrambled up from the rug and put on the kettle. She was nursing her teacup in her hands when Connie, still gummed up with afternoon sleep,-marched in towards her over the sheets of newspaper, the Officer's Midnight Prank headlines scattered over the floor. "_Careful__," cried Louie, hauntedly turning, "do be!" Connie, later, twitched up one sheet to re-read it, sucking a tooth. However, nothing connected Louie's refined new friend of the other evening with the dubious heroine of this tragedy--no name had then been spoken: now no name could be. Oh, if Connie had guessed she was being held out on!... Nor was this first secret to be the last--for the long-term effects on Louie of Stella's fall were kept hidden, throughout the time to follow, with unexpected care. Louie's dropping back again into vagrant habits remained unknown. No such very great degree of dissimulation turned out to be, after all, necessary; for it happened that Connie relaxed her vigilance--a friend who had been aggravating her for some time began to be more bother than he was worth. Not so much the friend as an uncharacteristic and nagging inability to decide just how much any man _was__ worth seized upon Connie, throwing her into moodi-ness, keeping her late abroad when she was not at the post, and confining her talk, when she did as of old look in, to a dire obsessional monologue. Connie had no longer an eye to spare. Also there went on, throughout that winter, being never a word as to hopes of leave from Tom, no longer in India now owing to being required in North Africa. 1942, still with no Second Front, ran out: nothing more than a sort of grinding change of gear for the upgrade was to be felt till the next war year steadied into its course. Cryptic were new 1943 block calendars. February, the Germans capitulated at Stalingrad; March, the Eighth Army broke through the Mareth Line. North African spring teemed with pursuits and astronomic surrenders, with a victoriousness hard, still, not to associate with the enemy. July, the Sicilian landings; the Russian opening of their great leafy Orel summer drive. Mussolini out. September, Italians out, but leaving Italy to it. Landings, beach-heads, Russian tanks lurching across the screens in London; November, Italian rivers, however, being crossed by us in strength. Winter known to have come by the Germans having their winter line shattered. Mussolini back. Pictures, less to be relished than had been hoped, of Berlin learning how it had been for London. The Big Three photographed smiling at Teheran. The idea of the European Fortress. The day after Christmas we sank the _Scharnhorst__, and upon the Russians having advanced up to sixty miles in five days in the Kiev salient, at the same time widening a breach to a front of a hundred and eighty miles, 1943 expired. War's being global meant it ran off the edges of maps; it was uncontainable. What was being done, for instance, against the Japanese was heard of but never grasped in London. There were too many theatres of war. 1944 was the year in which there could not but be the Second Front. General Smuts called it the Year of Destiny; the bombers continued to carry on preparatory work. As early as January we broke the Gustav Line; the Russians announced the lifting of the blockade of Leningrad. February, in Italy we encircled ten enemy divisions, but the Germans opened up against Anzio beach-head, which held. The wiping-out of Monte Cassino caused an uncertain breath to be drawn in cinemas: all this was going to be necessary, and more. Reflections were cut short by the renewal of air attacks on London--a five-night February season to be known as the Little Blitz. During that week, Roderick was at Mount Morris, having got permission to view for the first time, and arrange for the administration of, his property. In mufti, he had arrived in the damp' of a late-winter evening, alone. Work kept his mother in London: he was sorry and not sorry, she not sorry. Donovan, who had been listening for the hackney car, had stood holding a lamp in the high doorway at the top of the steps: he preceded his master into the hall, set down the lamp on the table and made a speech. Roderick, having listened less to the words than their echo through this house of his own, replied. Later, alone in the library, his first act had been to read the instructions printed by Cousin Francis on the cards stuck round the picture over the fire. He waited for Donovan to return in order to ask him: "Who is 'Lady C.'?" "That used to be Lady Condie." "What, dead now, is she?--In that case," Roderick said, "we shan't be getting any more messages from _her__." He plucked from the picture that particular card, tore it across and dropped it into the fire. "_Did__ the river rise, this winter?" he went on. "Did it get into the Lower Lodge?" "Not so far," admitted Donovan. "But it could. Mr. Morris always had a scheme for removing the Lodge to some place else.--Wasn't it funny, sir, them taking away Montgomery from the Eighth Army?" But Roderick was back to reading the cards. "What's become of the dogs which used to be the puppies? My mother said nothing about them. They weren't put down, I hope?" "No, sir; the instructions would have been a pity; they were breedy little dogs--I put them out through the country. I could get you a pup out of one of them any time. It was only the old big dog the master shot before he went off to England.--Would there be any thought of bringing the master back?" "I don't see why not," said Roderick, struck, "eventually. His bones ought to be here. But of course the whole thing was a muddle--I was never let know what was going on." Donovan stepped back and held open the door wider, to enable Mary to enter with the large supper tray. Roderick absently eyed the younger of the two girls of whom his mother had spoken. "I wish it were not so late!" he exclaimed suddenly. "I wish I could see--_is__ it going to be a very dark night? I want to go out and get the hang of everything--so far, I hardly realise I have arrived. Not that this is not a very nice room, of course," he added, respectfully looking up at the ceiling. "Larger and higher, if anything, than I had imagined. But it's baffling not to know what goes on outside it.--_Is__ it a very dark night?" "I should say, middling. You ought to be able to see your hand before you. Then will I not bar the door?" "You never need bar the door: I shall see to that." Mary, who had been studying Roderick without speaking, gave a final touch to the tray, then left the room: Donovan, though prepared to follow his daughter, spoke once more. "There's a more deceptive drop from here to the river than you might think," he said, though even so with detachment. "I even heard how once a carriage and pair of horses pitched over it in the darkness before we had the parapet--and again there's a rocky drop from the Alpine Walk, if you should be thinking of going that way. The rest of it might be slippery but it's harmless.--However, sir, from all I hear you should have come out of a wary training. They'd want you to be precise for a war of this kind." "Oh, I shall know where I am once I get going," said Roderick, confidently pulling a chair up to the tray, raising lids and beginning to eat supper. "I've been told what's there: I must just make sure that it _is" Coming in late that night he bolted, barred and chained up the door behind him, piously but with an inexpert clatter--the little lamp like a holy lamp the Donovans had left burning for him on the hall chest meanwhile magnifying his shadow. He had forgotten to ask, and they had been too deeply stirred to remember to show him, in which of the rooms upstairs he was to sleep; he had therefore to investigate, opening door after door. The darkness was nothing to him but a veil between himself and tomorrow, and his nostrils sifted out nothing but an enticing newness from the plastery smells. The house, where he was concerned, might have come into being only just in time to be here tonight; he remembered his mother's saying he must have been conceived here, but only perfunctorily did he wonder in which room. Drawn into one at last by a glow of embers and the sight of his bag put down at the foot of an opened bed, he looked no further: a row of bootjacks along the top of a press, straps on a hook and a parade of linament-bottles along the chimneypiece told him he was succeeding to Cousin Francis. The master's bedroom had crimson hangings and paper, against which what looked like mahogany temples stood. Whistling, Roderick began to throw his things out of his bag. But he had come in full of the outdoors, which welled up in him when, having put out the lamp, he laid down his head on the old man's pillow. Forms, having made themselves known through no particular sense, forms whose existence he was not to doubt again, loomed and dwelled within him. He had felt all round him height? weighed down upon by night, mysterious declivities, the breath through the unmoving air of moving water. Something more than silence there had been to be heard, though in the trees' leafless tops there was not even the rustle of a sleepy rook, and though throughout the relaxed woods not a bough grated or twig snapped. The invisible openness of the fields gave out not less stillness than the fern-rotted hollows; he had come to the humid stoniness of the garden wall, steadied himself on the unequal metalling of the cart tracks, put his hand on gates, struck out a twang from wire, established by touch the vital differing unhumanity of rocks, corrugated iron, tree trunks. He had from all points turned and returned to trace the elusive river-glimmer below him. Dark ate the outlines of the house as it ate the outlines of the hills and drank from the broken distances of the valley. The air had been night itself, re-imprinted by every one of his movements upon his face and hands--and still, now that he was indoors and gone to bed, impregnating every part of the body it had not sensibly touched. He could not sleep during this memory of the air. It had not been cold: the coming of winter to a stop had been most felt in the absolute nullness of tonight. It could be that Nature had withdrawn, leaving everything to be nothing but the identity of Mount Morris. The place had concentrated upon Roderick its being: this was the hour of the never-before--gone were virgin dreams with anything they had had of himself in them, anything they had had of the picturesque, sweet, easy, strident. He was left possessed, oppressed and in awe. He heard the pulse in his temple beating into the pillow; he was followed by the sound of his own footsteps over his own land. The consummation woke in him, for the first time, the concept and fearful idea of death, his. Ahead were his five days more here; ahead again was the possibility of his not coming back. He had not till tonight envisaged not coming back from war. Striking a match, he admired the time it burned. Then he heaved himself higher in the high bed, bracing his shoulders against the sharp-scrolled bedhead, arms folded, in order to set himself to consider the idea of succession. The antipatheticness to him of any abstract thought sent him away from that to his three fathers--the defeated Victor, the determining Cousin Francis, the unadmitted stepfather Robert: there was a confluence in him, at the moment, of the unequal three. How had _they__ made out? Had there not been a prematurity about each of their three deaths, not least the obstinate old man's? Or, _had__ they each, when it had come to a point, laid down what had become impossible to finish? Accept, as against that, that nothing might _be__ possible to finish--who would, indeed, aspire to be the final man? It was a matter of continuing--but what, what? As to that, there ought to be access to the mindless knowledge locked up in the rocks, in the stayers-on. Meanwhile, the Fortress of Europe was waiting to be stormed by Roderick: everything, everything, everything had to turn on that--everything but the February nocturnal existence of this place, which would know other Februaries. Should Roderick not come back... Recollecting that he ought to make a will, he in his own mind mildly reproached his mother for her failure to prompt him. By a written will one made subject some other person--but he saw that what worked most on the world, on him, were the unapprehendable inner wills of the dead. Death could not estimate what it left behind it. Robert's had left grief--what more, if there had been anything more, Roderick's mother had not told him. Roderick reflected that, as things were, there would be nobody but his mother to be _his__ heir, either: he felt this with chagrin both for himself and her--between them, they should have come to something further than this. He began to mutiny--which took the form of striking match after match till he had succeeded in relighting the little lamp. That done, he was once more inside four walls: drawing down in the bed he immediately fell asleep. Next day was full of things to be seen and done. "As I've been telling O'Connell," he said to Donovan, "for the present all we can hope to do is, keep this place ticking over till I get back. After that, of course, it will definitely have to begin to pay: Mount Morris has got to be my living. To start with, I'll have to learn--go to one or another of those agricultural set-ups for two, three, four years. Everything's got to be done scientifically these days; one can't just go fluffing along as an amateur. And I ought to put in capital, if I'm to get returns." "That way, you could sink a terrible lot of money." "Not if one's organised. And I should never have a terrible lot of money _to__ sink," he added, looking at Donovan formidably. "Mr. Morris used to be the one for considering improvements. It was wonderful the things he was to do--he was showing me pictures of machinery, and there were fellows forever coming and going giving us demonstrations, until latterly the war came to be the greater interest.--We raised the boat for you, sir, but she isn't much; she's decayed." "What boat?" said Roderick, blank. He recovered himself and said: "Oh yes, of course; _the__ boat. Well, that's a pity, but never mind: thanks. What a lot of work. I can't see, I must say, why it was ever sunk." "Precautions. I should say Mr. Robertson had that effect." "Who was Mr. Robertson?" "You would never know. It could be he was keeping some sort of eye on this country. Those were suspicious times, before they turned aside the Germans," said Donovan, dispassionately feeding wood to the range--they were in the kitchen. Two chickens fled from the swinging foot of Roderick, who was seated on the edge of the table--both girls had melted out of the kitchen as he came in, leaving a candle burning beside a teapot. The face of either Hannah or Mary appeared from time to time in the darkness of the doorway, but then always footsteps were to be heard padding lightly away again down the stone passage. "There was nothing to show in the end of it all," said Donovan. "However, the master had a great time with ideas." "From what you tell me," said Roderick, "this Robertson must have been a silly man--I can't say I've ever heard of him, and I don't wonder. Intelligence my eye. What did he take the German Army for? It was really rather a good thing they never landed." Donovan listened, impartial, to the roar in the range. "A chap turned up at the funeral," went on Roderick, "but _his__ name was Harrison." "It could be: it was some name of that sort.--Did you hear anything from London?" Donovan asked, facing round sombrely and abruptly. "No. Why?" "They're bombing away again. Isn't the mistress in it?" "Yes. Why?" "You left her very exposed." "Yes, Donovan, yes. But she's always done what she's liked." "I should say she'd always done what she could. Whatever she went through, she's very gentle. All the same, it was a pity you couldn't prevail on her to wait here." "Wait here what for?" "The better times." "Oh." Harrison, back again, stood in the middle of a street, otherwise empty, illuminated by a chandelier flare. During the pulse of silence between the overhead throbbing and the bark of the guns, the flare made the street like a mirrored drawingroom. Above where Harrison stood, peering at something jotted on an envelope, white-green incandescence flowed from the lovely shapely symbol, which slowly descended as it died--the sky to the east reflected flamingo-pink nobody could have taken to be the dawn; the west was jagged with flames. Ostensibly the population of London was underground: now and then could be heard an importunate clanging of N. F. S. or ambulance bells; once or twice a private car shot past. Bombardment reopened upon Harrison doggedly footing it in the direction of Stella's new flat, automatically swerving clear of buildings liable at any time to be struck and fall. The block she lived in teetered its height up into the dangerous night. Inside, no porter was in the lodge: Harrison for himself set in motion the gothic lift. The halt of the hum and the rattle of gates on her floor gave her time to wonder before her bell rang: when it did, she came to the door, though promptly, with the air of one who had already decided this must be a mistake. She wore an overcoat and was carrying a cat. They stared at one another. She exclaimed: "Where _have__ you been!" The cat gave a start and tried to run up her shoulder. "I hope this is not an awkward hour to drop in?" "Why, no," she said, civilly if uncertainly, "I wasn't doing anything particular--reading, listening to the guns. Gome in." She went ahead of him through another door to put the cat down; while he had, owing to the un-familiarity of this other, no less minute, hall, a renewal of difficulty over the old business of putting down his hat. "Yes, it's been quite a time since we met," he agreed, eventually following her in.--"I see," he added, glancing about the carpet as though he'd have liked to check up on a first impression, "you've got a cat now?" "Why, no; it's not mine. Nothing in this flat is--either," she said with a vagrant, echo-aroused smile. "It belongs next door, but its people are out, away, and I think it's nervous." "Pussy, hey, pussy--where are you?" said Harrison, clicking his fingers. Nothing having emerged, he squinted round to read the name of her book, left open face downward on the black fur hearthrug. "Quite like old times," he remarked, "quite a dirty night. Animals don't care for this sort of thing." "Quite like old times," she said, kneeling down, with her back to him, by the fire. "Before I met you, even." She warmed her hands. "_Is__ it cold in here? Perhaps not.--Do sit down," she added, over her shoulder. "What have you been doing?" "One thing and another. In fact, been out of this country. But that would be a long story." "Yes, I expect it would. You didn't lose your job, then? Once or twice I wondered whether you had." "What, me? Oh, you mean over _that__ affair? Oh no-no-no-no-no. Still, I was sorry that slipped up. So you held that against me?" While she still did not answer, he sat himself down quickly in one of two 'armchairs, taking advantage of the very last moment in which it might be possible or at any rate sensitive to do so. She registered what had gone on behind her without turning her head. He seemed glad, eager, to take this as however negative a reply. Anything more coming? From her, apparently not--anything further seemed to be due from him. Forward in the armchair he began frowning, pushing fist into palm. "Yes, that was bad," he agreed. "In my own way I may say I took quite a knock." "You did?" Stella said, rising from the hearthrug as though there were something weakening in that perpetual warming of the hands. She searched the chimney-piece for cigarettes to offer him, meanwhile recollecting that she and Robert still owed him what was left of a packet. A burst of close-up gunfire shook the building--whereupon she started to pace about, looking under the furniture for the cat. Harrison, silenced by the guns, seemed at the same time to feel exonerated from making any secret of the fact that he was following her with his eyes--even, when her movements took her behind his chair, turning right round to see where she was. She scooped up the cat and stood with it held against her: its fur seemed to shrink and dampen as a stick of bombs fell diagonally across the middle distance. Then it all died down. "It's so long," she said, "since we've had this. Hasn't it come back different?" Remarking the unsteadiness of her hand on the cat's flank, he said, with intimacy and insolence: "Perhaps you were not so sorry I came, then?" "I wish you had come before. There was a time when I had so much to say to you. There once was so much I wanted to know. After I gave up thinking I should see you again, I still went on talking and talking to you in my own mind--so I cannot really have felt you were dead, I think, because one doesn't go on talking and talking to any one of _them__: more one goes on hearing what they said, piecing and repiecing it together to try and make out something they had not time to say--possibly even had not had time to know. There still must be something that matters that one has forgotten, forgotten because at the time one did not realise how much it did matter. Yet most of all there is something one has got to forget--that is, if it is to be possible to live. The more wars there are, I suppose, the more we shall learn how to be survivors.--Yes, I missed you. _Your__ dropping out left me with completely nothing. What made you?" "That would be a long--" "--I'm not asking for stories. What happened?" "For one thing, I was switched." She stared at him. "That was how it was," he said, with a take-it-or-leave-it shrug. "There was quite a bit going on around that time, if you remember. That was the long and the short of it: I was switched." "I see," she said, paused, and put down the cat. "Well, here I still am," she said in a different tone. "Though now, as you see, _here__." "Here, you're still fairly snug?" he asked, looking round the room, making an obvious effort to see it all as other than sheer "otherness" of surroundings. These walls, of an unreflecting brown, were hung round with a set of Old London prints; there was an upright piano, a locked-looking glazed bookcase. The neck of a reading-lamp had been so twisted as to direct light on to the sage-green cushions of an armchair at present empty of her. Writing paper was stacked on a folding table, on which stood a wineglass holding a bunch of snowdrops--damaged, perhaps unpinned from her coat. From the shortness of the substantial curtains it could be guessed that the windows were set in high. He knew himself to be on the seventh floor. A dull little gunmetal ashtray caught his eye--"Funny, you know," he confessed, "how I still seem to be seeing that other place. That other place where you were." "Yes?" "I have so often thought of our times there." "What _was__ our quarrel?" She hesitated, after asking him this, but then sat boldly down in the green chair, full in the light. "What did I do?" "You were wonderful. As, as a matter of fact, you are tonight--wherever you are, you are. I don't know how it is!" "Please!" she cried, holding up her hand sharply. "I asked you a question. _What__ happened? After all, you killed Robert." "Now how do you make out that?" "Only you know what happened," she went on, indifferently giving this as a fact. "You know what I don't: the whole of the story. You chose to take that with you: you disappeared. For a long time, that's been what I've wanted to ask you. Now you're back--but _now__, why? Why ask? Possibly the time's passed." He shifted his feet, equivocally, on the black hearthrug. "What, not altogether?" she said, as though in reply to the movement. "Very well, then in that case, tell me--you knew Robert was going to be arrested that night. How much say in that had you? When had that been decided?--or was it not?" "_I__ always rather took it," Harrison said, "that he himself rather took it the game was up? In that case, frankly, he knew as much as I did. That was up to him, naturally--/ was out." "Since when?" "Since the night before." "Since the night we quarrelled?" "Quarrelled?" he said. "When?" She put out a hand and bent the lamp away from her. "If you don't remember," she said, "perhaps it never happened. Perhaps I've thought too much." "I've thought, all right." He stopped to frown at a thumb-nail, then looked across at her now in-shadow face. "About this thing between us--but how 'a quarrel'?" The guns rested her by opening up once more: she leaned back to hear them, acquiescent, against the cushions. The bulb of the lamp in its socket and frames of the windows shook--otherwise, this room remained a dark-lined kernel of silence under the flare-pale resounding sky. In the subsidence of the shocks of the guns could be heard the lofty drumming of the raider: while this lasted one kind of utter solution was in the offing--but no, it was not to be that way; nothing fell. The guns, made fools of, died out again, askance. "No right _or__ wrong to it after all, perhaps?" she at last said. Harrison, who had sat through the minutes with a concentrated appearance of hearing nothing, went on: "Yes, thought about you--and in some pretty queer places." "All this time, you've been out of England?" "Obviously--surely?" "Still, you knew where to find me." "Oh, one soon picks up threads.... Well, here we are, back to it. Or, don't you think so?" He fixed his eyes on her with an only wavering certainty, as though, possibly, for guidance. "No--one never goes back. One never is where one was. I see you may have been right; I see there may _have__ been something between us--if there had not _been__ something, how should we both, tonight, know it wasn't there any more? If you had been here immediately after--if you had not disappeared when you did--who knows? You were the last of him.--No, not that: I _am__ the last of him. You, then? Were you then, somehow, love's necessary missing part? You brought that into us, if you killed him. But now, you and I are no longer two of three. From between us some pin has been drawn out: we're apart. We're not where we were--look, not even any more in the same room. The pattern's been swept away, so where's the meaning? Think!" He only repeated: "But I have thought about you," in an unrelinquishing tone. "There _was__ a night--yes, that last time we met--when I said, 'Very well, then, yes,' but you sent me home." "Yes: that was not what I wanted." "What _did__ you want, then, when it came to the point?" He fitted his thumb-nails together, did not answer. "You did not know; you did not know what to do." "What, didn't I?" he said in a driven way. He got up suddenly and walked across to the table with the snowdrops; he stood over them--"Pretty," he stated under his breath, giving the bruised petals an automatic touch. "If you mean," he added, "that evening there was the dog, I don't remember. More, there was that other evening when there was the rain. All I know is, as I say, I've thought about you. I didn't come back all this way only to say goodbye--did I?" "You don't think there's any virtue in a goodbye? I do. I've wanted to be able to say goodbye to you: till this could be possible you've haunted me. What's unfinished haunts one; what's unhealed haunts one.--Harrison?" "That's the first time you've called me anything, I think." "I don't know your other, your Christian name." "I don't know that you'd care for that very much," he said, shouldering into the curtain behind the table. "Why, what's wrong with it?--what is it?" "Robert." "Oh, I see.... Well, I expect in any case I should have gone on thinking of you as Harrison. I'd been going to say--" she dropped her wrist across her eyes, as though the averted lamp were still full upon her. "I'd been going to say, goodbye any way you like. Stay tonight, if you like, if that would finish your thoughts?" He picked up the glass of snowdrops, then put it down again. "No, I thought not," she said. "What's the good of doing anything for the sake of the past?" "No, it's more," he said, with his back to her, "that I never did, remember, expect you to do anything for nothing." "What is 'nothing'?" "As I told you, I never have been loved.--No," he added, coming briskly back from the table, taking up a position on the hearthrug to stare down, more unequivocally than he ever yet had, at the chair with her in it, "my forte has I suppose always rather more been, plans.--What are yours, for instance, these days? You staying on here?" "For one thing, I think I am going to be married." "Indeed. Is that so?" He paused, needing all he had to keep in command his features during their change, their change into the expression of a violent, fundamental relief. "That's so, then?" But he now began to re-eye her with severe closeness, on behalf of an unknown somebody else. "All the same, what do you mean, you 'think,' though? As to a thing of that kind, surely you ought to _know__?" "Well, I do know--now." "Ha-ha: better.--May one ask who it is?" She told him, adding: "He's a cousin of a cousin." "Rather more than that, he's a brigadier, surely?" "Well, I know," she said, with a touch of the old irritation. "So you think this is an extraordinary thing for him to do?" "No, I wouldn't--" "--I agree, it's nice of him." "No, now, come, Stella, what I do mean's this: if this _is__ the case, this is quite a different affair. You've got yourself to take care of. What do you think you're doing skittering round in a top-floor flat on a night like this, with this heavy stuff coming down all over the place? Far from fair on the chap: you should think of him. You might not give a damn _what__ happened--I must say, you gave me that impression, first. Does that make sense, now you've got prospects?" "Prospects have alternatives." "Collect that cat, if you must, but if this keeps on you ought to think of cutting down to the hall." "I always have left things open.--As a matter of fact, though, I think the raid's over." "In that case..." said Harrison, looking at his watch. "Or would you rather I stayed till the All Clear?" Towards the end of that week of nights, Louie and Connie were doing their hair and faces, side by side, in front of the long horizontal mirror of the marbled subterranean Ladies of a West End caf6. This was about ten o'clock in the evening. Connie's work on herself was thorough; Louie had for some time stood in a vacuum, twiddling at her bow clip, before, turning away her head from her own reflection, she said that she was going to have a baby. Connie continued work on her fringe. "Oh, you never listen to what I say!" "You're always saying _something"__ grumbled her friend, groping around the basin for invisible hairpins. "What is it now?" "I said--it looks as if I was going to have a baby." Connie hissed: "Shut up!--Where do you think we are?" She cast a wary rapid look round the place. Louie, however, had not chosen her moment as badly as it seemed--no other ladies happened to be down here. "The things you think of! However could--?" All the same, slowly she put her comb down. Their eyes met in the glass. Less in despair than fatalism, Connie exclaimed: "Well, you _have__ been a silly girl.... Haven't you?" Louie, as though in extenuation, said: "Well, it's been on my mind." "I told and told you! Nature's ever so sharp!" Louie, not without dignity, assented: she hung her head. Connie, in a mechanical stunned way, amassed the rest of the hairpins and pronged them back into different curls of her fringe--but then, halfway through, the very ordinariness of the action seemed to unnerve her: she stopped dead, hands up, and cried out: "Now we _are__ in the soup!--For example, what's your husband going to say?" "That's what I wondered." Louie frowned and turned on a hot tap: she watched the strong jet of steamy water rush round and round the basin. "Under other circumstances, he might have been pleased. When you think of all he and I have been through together, this seems not natural, Connie, that he should not know." "What do you expect _me__ to do?" "Well, I don't know, really. I was more wondering what I should do myself." "Still, you come asking me: You know you do, you come asking me. Everyone comes asking me." Connie shot out a hand and turned off the hot tap, furiously: the wasted steam died down. "You mad?" she cried. "When the King himself only uses five inches in his bath? Seizing this occasion to take leave of _all__ your senses? What do you think this makes you?--You're only one of many." This Louie seized upon. "Well, I _am__, aren't I--just one of many?" A sort of illumination widened over her features--slowly, but with a sureness from which one might have suspected that it was not new to them. And worse, in the view of Connie, this settled into a look of inward complacency, even sublimity. She admitted: "I've sometimes thought that myself." "Oho," lashed out Connie, "so you feel fine? That's fine." Louie flinched at once. She set and unset her lips; she held on to the edge of the marble slab--meaninglessly, unless this were for support. Between her reflection, and Connie's, and Connie's actual face, no one of them longer to be confronted, she simply physically did not seem to know which way to turn. "Don't _you__ be angry: you're the first I've told! How does it seem of me, then--so awful? Half of the time this is not half real to me, Con-nie; more like a thing I hear of. I don't know how I should feel: I could equally laugh or cry. Whatever _is__ this?--I've got to see from you. You _are__ angry?" "No, you great sissy, no; I just give you up." "I would not for anything have upset you--perhaps I've been wrong?" "Such a time to choose," Connie could not help pointing out, "after night after night of enemy action. Still, it had to come out." She began to pack back her compact, comb and other etceteras into her handbag; she shut this with a very decisive click, which made her think of something more to be said. "Who was it?--You got any idea?" Louie, in what was just not confusion, began to ramble to and fro searching for gloves--one had fallen off the marble on to the floor: she remembered Stella's grace of two years ago. These naturally were not the same pair; they were a degree more fancy, fringed at the wrists, and still more mauled-looking. She stooped to pick up the fallen. "Must be some friend I made.... I don't think the name would mean anything to you, Connie." "_Which__ name wouldn't mean anything to me?" "You and I've seen so little of each other, this last year." Connie, placing her bag in position under her elbow, glanced once towards Louie, down a perspective of wash-basins, with no expression at all. "Rightie-ho, then." Life, it was to be seen, selected its own methods of going on. "First and foremost," she said, "we better had do what we had intended: eat.--That's right, that's right: take one or two more looks round. What are you leaving behind you _this__ time, I do wonder?--Having had our supper, how about if we thought? We shall require to." She guided Louie firmly towards the exit staircase, on which they passed two ladies on their way down. The baby, it was established, would be due about the middle of July. "No doubt we shall be having the Second Front by that time, also," remarked Louie. Her big sturdy build made her state not, for a good time longer, evident: Connie advised her staying on at the factory for as long as could be. Her only pregnancy sickness was for home, for Seale-on-Sea--but ever more strictly, as with each month the invasion of Europe by us loomed nearer, was the ban on civilian entry into that area being enforced. However, now in London, it came to seem to her, _all__ eyes were turning towards the coast, the sea. Spring days growing longer grew more momentous; there were calculations as to the moon; day and night London shook with Invasion traffic roaring through it to unknown ports. Expectation came to its height, and stood: everybody waited. Louie found herself looking constantly into that very photograph of Tom which had once forbidden her; she felt herself beckoned into that gaze of abstention and futurity--was she not in her own way also drawing abreast of what was to be? Tom himself was in the Italy fighting: it went more against the grain with her, each time she wrote a letter, to dissimulate--why should not he reach out a hand to her as she was? She was his wife. She required to tell him of her sense of no longer being alone. That was obstinate vision of what _should__ be could exist side-by-side with instructed fear of being cast out by him was a miracle: not a thing supported it. Nothing, nothing was to be said for Louie. What _would__ he say? From fear of seeing where it said what he would have a right to say, she took against newspapers--whose front pages were themselves being pervaded by pregnant secrecy. When it came to the time when Connie judged that Chilcombe Street might begin to notice--in which case, who knew who might not take it upon themselves to write Tom one of those wicked letters?--Louie was moved by Connie into another room which had been found, about half a mile away: well that she had got that money to draw on, now paying two rents. Chilcombe Street remained her postal address; she headed letters to Italy as from there. In the emptied first-floor Chilcombe Street double room, Connie considered it best to install herself--otherwise, who knew who might not get their foot round that door? Tom with no place to come back to?--that would cap all. Connie, at the start, had done what seemed only right in suggesting there could, of course, be _one__ way out: she always had the address. She had not really, however, expected Louie to have that much sense, or whatever else it took. "Right," she therefore left it. "I somehow knew you'd be stubborn. In fact I'm beginning to suspect this is what you want." "It wasn't what I _wanted__." "So you say. But now look how it's got hold of you." "All things being the same, I sooner would be a mother, I now see. I can't somehow wish to be as before," "What you _were__ in aid of," Connie had to admit, "often was a mystery to me." "There's always only this: Tom not knowing," Louie always repeated, with that movement of her inhabited eyes. "I do so wish, Connie, you'd think of some way I could put it rightly.--What should I say?" Automatically the question repeated itself, more and more taxing Connie as Louie's passiveness biggened with her body. Left in the world of reality, at bay, Connie fell back a little on the general belief that the Second Front would, somehow, set up a moratorium as to everything. The Second Front was thought to be, like a race, fixed for a day or two after Whitsun. Whitsun went by in an irreproachable glare of racing weather: still nothing happened. Ultimately, one afternoon in Chilcombe Street, off duty, Connie took up her pen--only to stare for some minutes longer at the cloth of the table at which, evening after evening, Tom watched by Louie had studied his technical books. It could be possible that his eyes, shifting from the page as he stopped and thought, had left some key to his ego, his mentality, in the table-cloth pattern _he__ must have traced not less absorbedly than did Connie now. She started slowly to write:-- Dear Tom, I take up my pen as a close girl friend whom you may have heard of, of your wife Louie. Am hoping you will let my intruding pass, owing to her not knowing quite what to say, as you will understand shortly. It would mean much to her to know you saw in the true light what I shall now tell you. She has been quite a curious girl in the way she has been missing and fretting for you, always straying about like a dog with no one, and also you have to take into account how completely her parents were wiped out, unsettling her. I know this is much to ask a man, but all I can say is that I have had recently to take much that might seem peculiar into account myself. It is no use for you or me to judge, you simply have to allow for how anything is going to take a person, as to which there is no saying till you see. She thinks so highly of you that it would be of assistance if you could bring yourself to understand how it all was, and therefore think of her fondly at this time, owing to all she is going through for your sake. There is no disguising that left to ourselves many of us are peculiar, one mistake leading on to others, so must trust you will see what is to blame. I fear I ought now to come to the point, letting you know that, consequently, Louie is now about-- --Connie was interrupted by an imperative ringing of the street door bell, followed by rat-a-tat on the knocker. Stubbing her nib on her writing-pad she listened, persecutedly, lowering her head, waiting. The attack renewed itself: no step of anybody going to the door was to be heard anywhere in the afternoon house. She put her thumbs to her ears, re-read the letter as far as it had got, then all at once found herself thinking slowly: "How if I never had to finish it?" She went down and took in the telegram--which was, indeed, for Louie. Having opened the telegram, Connie stood in awe. "Nearly, I _was__ presumptuous," she thought. Questions to which we find no answer find their own. She set out to walk through the torpid glary May afternoon streets to that other room, just across the railway line, where Louie was. "So if I had worried, it would have been wrongly, for nothing," was one of the first things Louie remarked, later. "I should now be blaming myself for not having known better--instead of which, it was wonderful how I did. That always came, you see, from knowing him patient with me from first to last, however upright he was.--What've you done with where it says? I want to have that, to keep. "The telegram--do you?" "Why yes: for the kid." "They're ACROSS!" It had happened--under a curdled windy improbable June night. The whole of the story narrowed down to Louie, still with _her__ hour ahead, heavily going to her window. Voices were in the street below; multiplied, one voice from dozens of radios came lancing across and across itself out of dozens of windows standing open. Louie leaned out and shouted: "What--is that true?" It was. There was, however, nothing for her to do but sit down again to her seven-year-old stitching--until she, uncontrollably, dropped her work, pushed up her cheeks with both knuckles, began to pray. There was at the same time being an unco-ordinated movement into churches. The unexpected-expected day, with its feeling of elsewhereness, ran its broadcast-echoing course. You could not take back what had been done. The lucid outgoing vision, the vigil for the fighters, lasted ten days more, till the Secret Weapon started: then, it was shameful how fear wrenched thoughts home--droning _things__, mindlessly making for you, thick and fast, day and night, tore the calico of London, raising obscene dust out of the sullen bottom mind. There was no normal hour. Connie first brought Louie back to Chilcombe Street--what did it matter, any longer?--then attempted to run her out of London, but, to where? On and off, on and off sounded the sirens in the nightmare sunlessness: perpetually, Connie had to be dashing to the post. "I should not care to go among strangers," reiterated the sweating Louie, holding tight to the end of the big familiar bed. Then again the wail would go up the air. "The sireen, again--whatever are they thinking of?" "That's the all bloody clear, dear--you never learn, do you?" "Does not make much difference, though, does it, Connie?" The boy was born a little before his time. Christened Thomas Victor, he took no notice of anything--however, Louie agreed she should take him out of London now he was born. He and she, accordingly, departed from the very door of the hospital into abeyance in a Midland county, in which luck guided her to a still handsome second-hand pram. This pram she learned to wheel, brake, tilt, even to tow behind her as she progressed gazingly along the windows of shopping streets. The baby's intention to survive put itself across her and taught her sense: the clearance, across at the other side, of the last of the enemy out of the Channel ports made it possible for her to return to Seale-on-Sea, an orderly mother. The sea, there, glittered as though nothing had happened. She installed herself in the lodgings. Then, that very afternoon of her return, she could not wait; she took Tom straight round to his grandparents'. The thin air which had taken the house's place was, now that she stood and breathed in it, after all full of today and sunshine; the ridges left by the foundations feathered and stirred with grass in light and shadow. It was September, dahlias and asters blooming only a garden or two away. This was, as it always had been, a very quiet road, inland, with lime trees planted along the pavement. The baby slept in his pram on the flat site of the entrance-path to the house: uphill, the church clock struck, and she looked up at the sound. Next day, the sun was succeeded by a white quiet light. Just after six o'clock in the evening, Louie wheeled the perambulator some way out of the town, along the canal path, towards the Marsh. Reeds grew out into the still water; ahead, there was distance as far as the eye could see--a thoughtless extension of her now complete life. Across the canal the hills rose, bare, above the other bank's reflected oak trees. No other soul passed; not a sheep, even, was cropping anywhere nearby. A minute or two ago our homecoming bombers, invisibly high up, had droned over: the baby had not stirred--every day she saw him growing more like Tom. But now there began another sound--she turned and looked up into the air behind her. She gathered Tom quickly out of the pram and held him up, hoping he too might see, and perhaps remember. Three swans were flying a straight flight. They passed overhead, disappearing in the direction of the West.
The End


