

Absolute	Beginners


COLIN  MACINNES

















ALLISON & BUSBY LONDON ·NEW YORK
 








F O R  A L F R E D  M A R O N
 






 


I N  J U N E I N   J U L Y
I N   A U G U S T
 
C O NTE NT S
 


Page 11

109

149
 

 
I N   S E P T E M B E R
 
167
 

 




IN J U N E
 






IT w A s with the advent of the Laurie London era that I realized the whole teenage epic was tottering to doom.
'Fourteen years old, that  absolute  beginner,'  I said  to the Wizard as we paused casually in the gramophone section to hear  Little Laurie in that golden disc performance of his.
'From now on,' said Wizard, 'he's certainly Got The Whole World In His Hands.'
We listened to the wonder boy's nostrils spinning on.
'They buy us younger every year,' I cried. 'Why, Little  Mr L.'s voice hasn't even dropped yet, so who will those tax-payers try to kidnap next?
'Sucklings,' said Wizard.
We climbed the white stair to the glass garden under the top roof of the department store, and  came out on  the glorious  panorama, our favourite rendezvous.
I must explain the Wiz and I never come to this store to buy any­ thing except, as today, a smoke-salmon sandwich and ice coffee. But in the first place, we have the opportunity to see the latest furnish­ ings and fabrics, just like some married couple, and also to have the splendid outlook over London, the most miraculous I know in the whole city, and quite unknown to other nuisance-values of  our  age, in fact to everyone, it seems, except these elderly female Chelsea peasants who come up there for their elevenses.
Looking north you don't see much, it's true, and westward the view's entirely blocked up by the building you're inside. But twist­ ing slowly on your bar stool from the east to south, like Cinerama, you can see clean new concrete cloud-kissers, rising up like felixes from the Olde Englishe squares, and then  those  gorgeous  parks, with trees like classical French salads, and then again the port life down along the Thames, that glorious river, reminding yon we're on an estuary, a salt inlet really, with cruzy seagulls circling up from it and almost bashing their beaks against the circular plate glass, and then, before you know it, you're back again round  a full circle in front         ur iced coffee cup.
'Laurie L. ' I said, "s a sign of decadence. This teenage thing is
getting out of hand.'
11	(
 


 
12	COLIN   MACIN NES
The Wiz looked wise, like the middle feller of the  three  old monkeys.
'It's not the tax-payers,' he said, 'who are responsible. It's the kids themselves, for buying the EPs these elderly sordids bribe the teen­ age nightingales  to wax.'
'No doubt,' Isaid, for Iknow  better  than  ever  to  argue  with  the Wizard, or with anyone else who gets his kicks from an idea.
Mr Wiz continued, masticating his salmon sandwich for anyone to see,  'It's  been  a  two-way  twist,  this  teenage  party.  Exploitation  of the  kiddos  by the  conscripts,  and  exploitation  of  themselves  by  the crafty  lie  absolute  beginners.  The  net  result?  "Teenager"'s  be­ come a dirty word or, at any rate, a square one.'
Ismiled  at  Mr  W.  'Well,  take  it  easy,  son,'  Isaid,  'because  a sixteen year old sperm like you has got a lot of teenage living still to do. As for me,  eighteen  summers,  rising  nineteen,  111 very  soon  be out there among the oldies.'
The  Wizard  eyed  me  with  his  Somerset  Maugham  appearance. 'Me, boy,' he said, 'I tell you. As things  are, Iwon't  regret  it when
the teenage label's tom off the arse pockets of my drip-dry sky-blue jeans.'
What  the  Wiz  said  was  at  any  rate  partially  true.  This  teenage ball had  had  a real  splendour  in the days when  the -kids  discoveroo that,  for  the  first  time   since  centuries   of   kingdom-come,   they'd money,  which  hitherto  had  always  been  denied  to  us  at  the  best time in life to use it, namely, when you're young and sb"ong, and also before  the  newspapers  and  telly  got hold  of  this  teenage  fable  and prostituted   it  as. conscripts  seem  to  do  to  everything  they  touch. Yes,  Itell you,  it had  a real  savage splendour  in the  days when  we found that  no one couldn't  sit on  our  faces  any more  because  we'd loot to spend at last, and our world  was to be our world, the one we
wanted and not standing on the doorstep of somebody else's waiting for honey, perhaps.
Igot off my stool and went and stood by the glass of that tottering old    epartment  store, pressed  up so close it was likeIwas out there in the air, suspended over space above the city, and Iswore by Elvis and all the saints that this last teenage year of  mine was going to be a  real  rave.  Yes,  man,  come  whatever,  this  last year  of  the  teenage dream I was out for kicks and fantasy.
 
ABSOLUTE  BEGINNERS	13
But my peace was shattered by the noise I heard of Wizard in an argument with the conscript behind the counter bar.
Ishould  explain 'the Wiz  has  for  all oldies  just  the  same  kind  of hatred  psychos  have  for Jews  or foreigners  or coloureds,  that  is, he hates  everyone  who's not  a  teenager,  except  for  short-pant  sperms and  chicklets, whom  Isuppose  he  regards  as teenagers  in bud.  The Wiz just  doesn't like the population  outside the teenage bracket,  and takes every chance he gets to make the oldies conscious of their hair­ root dyes, and sing out aloud the anthem of the teenage triumph.
Wiz  has the  art of  clawing  the  poor  tax-payers  on  the  raw.  Even from  where  Istood  Isaw  the  barman's  face  was  lurid  as  a  point steak,  and  as  Iapproached  Iheard  that  sharp,  Bat,  dry little  voice the Wizard has, was needling him with, 'Oh, Isuppose you're under­ paid, boy, that's what's the matter with you. Don't like your  work  up here with these old hens.'
'You'd best settle up and 'op it,' said the conscript.
The Wizard turned to me. "'Op it," he says-just listen! This serf speaks authentic old-tyme M y Fair Lad y dialect.'
The Wizard's tactic  always was to tempt  the enemy  to  strike  him which,  because  he's  small,  and  seems  so  slender  and  so  juvenile, arouses  sympathy  of  other  oldsters,  the  born   aunts  among  them especially,  who  take  his  side  and  split  the  anti-teenage  camp wide open. He often succeeds, because Ican tell you he's completely fear­ less,  a  thoroughly  vicious,  dirty  little  pugilist,  and  only  fails  when sometimes they  laugh  at him, which  makes  him beside  himself  with rage.
The  present  argument,  as  Iexpected,  was  about  the  bill,  which Wizard,  when  he's  in  the  mood,  will  query  even  if  it's  for  an  item like a cup  of  tea. And  often,  even  when  he's loaded,  he'll  make  out he's completely skint and say to them well, there you  are, I've got no money,  what  you  going to do about  it? And this with  the left breast pocket  of  his  Continental  casual  jacket  stuffed  with  notes  and  even visible,  but  his  face so fierce  and  come-and-kill-me  that  it  frightens them, and even me. It usually seems to work, because they say get to hell out, which  he  does in his  own  time,  and  at his  own  speed, as if it was an eight-course  meal, he'd  had  and paid  for, not just  bounced a bill.
I paid  for him,  and  Wiz  didn't mind my  paying,  only  laughed that
 

14	COLIN  M ACIN NES
little ha-ha laugh of his as we walked down the white and silver metal stair. 'Boy,' he said, 'you're a born adult number. With your conventional outlook, you just can't wait to be a family man.'
I was vexed at him, but answered, 'Don't be like that, Wizard. We all know you're loaded, so why do you play that kindergarten game?'
Which is a fact, I mean his being loaded, because the Wiz, in spite of his tender years, is, for his age, the number one hustler of the capital, his genius being in introducing A to B, or vice  versa, that  is to say, if someone has an article to sell, and someone else desires it, Wiz has a marvellous instinct for meeting them both and bringing them together. But, you might answer, that's what shops are for, which is exact. But not for exchanging the sort of  article  the Wizard's customers are interested in which, as you've  guessed, are not so legal, and when I say 'article', I mean it may be the kind of services which might make you call the Wiz a pimp, or a procurer if you wanted to, not that it would worry him particularly.
I've wondered how the Wizard gets away with  it, because,  after all, he deals with male and female hustlers who must be wiser than he is, and certainly, at  any rate,  are stronger.  But he handles them all right-in fact in a way that makes you proud to be a kid. And how he does it is, I think, that he's found out at a very  early  age what most kids never know, and what it took me years myself to discover-in fact it didn't dawn on me until this year, when the knowledge  of   it's  come  too  late  to  use-namely,   that  youth   has
_power,  a kind  of  divine power  straight  from  mother nature.  All the old  tax-payers  know  of  this  because,  of  course,  for  one  thing,  the poor  old  sordids  recollect  their  own  glorious  teenage  days,  but  yet they're  so jealous  of  us,  they  hide  this  fact,  and  whisper  it  among themselves.  As  for the  boys  and  girls,  the  dear  young  absolute  be­ ginners,  I sometimes  feel  that  if  they  only knew  this fact, this  very simple fact,  namely  how  powerf ul  they  really  are,  then  they  could rise up overnight  and enslave the old tax-payers,  the  whole  dam  lot of them-toupets  and falsies and rejuvenators  and all-even though they number  millions  and sit in the seats of strength. And I guess it was  the  fact  that  only  little  Wizard  realized  this,  and  not  all  the other  two million  teenagers  they  say exist  throughout  our  country, that makes him so sour, like a general with lazy troops he can't lead into battle.
 
A BSOLUTE  BEG IN N ER S	15
'He's got the whole wide world in his hands!
'He's got this crumby village drapers, in his hands! 'He's got . . .'

This was the Wizard, singing his improvisation on the Laurie London number. And as the stairway cage was probably built of breeze-blocks, there was a loud-hailer echo up and down the flights which astonished the lady peasants who were using it to carry home their purchases.
'Easy now,' I said, laying my hand upon the Wizard's arm.
He  wrenched  it  away,  and  glared  at  me  as  if I was  what  I  cer­ tainly was just  at that moment, his deadliest enemy.
'Don't  touch  me!'  he  said,  if  you  can  call  it  'said',  because
'screeched' would be more like it.
'All right, big boy,' I told him, mentally washing my hands of the whole dam matter.
We came out of the glass doors into an absolutely fabulous June
day, such as only that old whore London can throw up, though very occasionally. The Wizard stood looking up at me as if debating whether to insult me, or to call the cold war off.
'Dig this, Wiz,'  I said to him.  Tm not  by nature  given  to  inter­
ference, it's just that I think the way you're going on you'll kill yourself, which I'd regret .'
This  seemed  to please  him,  and  he  smiled. And  when  the little
Wizard drops his guard it really is miraculous, because a really charming boy looks out at you from behind that razor-edge face of his, if only for an instant. But he didn't say anything to me.
'I got to go and see Suzette,' I told him. 'I hear she has a client
for me.'
'You should like that,' said Wizard, 'after you've spent so much paying bills for me.'	(
'You're a horrid  little creature,  Wiz,' I told  him. 'It's a wonder   to
me they don't use you for some experiment.'
'See you,' said Wizard. 'Please give my hate to little  Suze.'
He'd hailed a cab, because Wizard only travels about in taxis, and will walk for miles rather than use the public transportation system; though I sometimes have known him take a late night bus. He had a long  argument  with  the  driver  before  he  got  in-it seems Wizard
 


 
16	COLIN   MACINNES
was trying to persuade the citizen to leave one door open, so that the summer breezes could ruffie the Wizard's true-blond Marlon Brando hair-do on his journey.
But I couldn't wait to see if he succeeded, because  with Suzette you have to be dead on time for this reason, that if she sees any Spade she likes the look of, she'll get up at once and follow him, come what may, though I will say for her that she'll sit like her bottom was glued to the seat till whatever  time  you've  dated her for, even if Harry Belafonte should walk by. Her name, by the way, Suzette, has been given to her because that's  what,  according to Suze herself, a Spade lover of hers called her once when, gazing hungrily at her from top to toe, especially toe, this Spade, who was a Fang boy from French Cahoon, said to her, 'Cherie, you are my Crepe  Suzette, I'm going to eat you.' Which I've no doubt he   did.
The fact is, that little sweet seventeen Suzette is Spade-crazy. I've often explained to her that to show you're a friend of the coloured races, and free from race prejudice and all that crap, you don't have to take every Spade you meet home and drag him between sheets. But Suzette is quite shameless about it, enjoys the life, and naturally is very popular among the boys. She doesn't make any money out of her activities, because though I think she'd like to, and certainly would, and quite a bit of . it, if she happened to like whites, the Spades don't give her anything, not because they're not loaded or generous, both of which they very often are, but because every Spade believes, in spite of any evidence to the contrary (and  there's a lot), that every woman in creation is thirsting for the honour of his company. So poor old Suzette, in spite of her being the belle of    the
Strutters' Ball' has to toil every dav, at a fashion  house,  which  as  a matter of fact is how she is so useful to me.
I now shall disclose my graft, which is peculiar. It's not that I haven't tried what's known as steady labour, both manual and brain, but that every job I get, even the well-paid ones (they were the manual), denied me the two things I consider absolutely neces­ sary for gracious living, namely-take out a pecil,  please, and write them down-to work in your own time and not somebody else's, number one, and number two, even if you can't make big money every day, to have a graft that lets you make it sometime. It's terrible, in other words, to live entirely without hope.
 
ABSOLUTE  BEG IN NERS	17
So what I am, is a photographer: street, holiday park, studio, artistic  poses  and,  from  time  to  time,  when  I  can  find  a client,
·pornographic. I know it's revolting, but then it only harms the psychos who are my .customers, and as for the kids I use for models, they'd  do it all down to giggles, let alone for the fee I pay  them. have a job like mine means  that  I  don't  blong to great commumty of the mugs: the vast majority of squares who are exploited. It seems to me this being a mug or a non-mug is a thing that splits humanity up into two sections absolutely. It's nothing to do with age or sex or class or colour-either you're born  a mug or born  a non-mug,  and me, I sincerelitrust I'm born the  latter.
So now you can see why, from time to time, I pay a call on Suze. For Suze, in the course of business at her fashion house, meets  lots of kinky characters, usually among the daddies of the chicks who dress there, and acts as agent for  me  gettng orders from them  for my pornographic photos,  drawing  commission  from me at the  ae of 25 per cent. So you realize Suze is a sharp gal, and no doubt this is because she's not only English, but part Gibraltarian, partly Scotch and partly Jewish, which is perhaps why I get along with her, as I'm supposed to have a bft 'of Jewish blood from my mother's veins as well-at any rate, I know I'm  circumcised.
I found Suze in her Belgravia coffee bar, just near  her work, which was one of the weirdie varieties, called The Last Days of Pompeii, and done up to represent just 'that, with stone seats in dim nooks, and a ruined well as the centre-piece, and a mummified Roman let into a hole in one of the walls just for kicks, I dare say. Suze was allowing her cappuccino to grow cold, and nibbling at a cream cheese and  gherkin  sandwich, for Suze never  eats middays, as she's inclined to plumpness, which I rather like, but makes µp for it at evening time with huge plates of chicken  and  peas  she cooks for her Spade visitors.
'Hi,darl,' she said. 'Hi, hon,' I answered.
That's how we heard two movie stars address each other at a film we went to ages ago that rather sent us, in the days when Suze afld I were steady.
'How are the boys?' I asked her, sitting down opposite, and  under
that tiny table putting my knees to hers.
 
18	COLIN  MA CI N N ES
'The boys,' she said, 'are quite all right. Quite, quite okay.' 'Have you had your hundredth  yet?' I asked her.
'Not yet a hundred,' Suzc replied, 'not yet,  no,  I  don't  think so, not a hundred.'
I  ordered  my  stripe<l  cassata.  'You  ever  think  of  marrying  with one  of   them?'   I  asked   her   edgily,  as  usual   slipping   into  that groove of nastiness that affects me wheneverItalk to Suze of her love
life.
She looked dreamy, and actually Hipped her eye-lashes in the Italian starlet manner. 'If ever I marry,' she said, 'it will be exclu­ sively for distinction. I mean to make a very distinguished   marriage.'
'Not with a Spade, then.'
'No, I don't think so.' She blew a little brown nest in the  white froth of her cappuccino. 'As a matter of fact,' she said, 'I've had an offer. Or what amounts to an offer.'
She stopped, and gazed at me. 'Go on,' I said. 'From Henley.'
'No!'
She nodded, and lowered he; eyes. 'That horrible old poof!' I cried.
I should explain that Henley is the  fashion  designer  Suzette works for, and old enough to be her aunt, quite apart from any­ thing else.
Suze looked severe and sore at me. 'Henley,' she said, 'may be an invert, but he has distinction.'
'He's certainly  got  that!'  Icried.  'Oh, he's  certainly  got  that  all right!'	·
She paused . 'Our marriage,' she continued, 'would of course be sexless.'
'You bet it would!' I yelled. I glared at her, seeking the killer phrase. 'And what will Miss Henley say,' I shouted, 'when  the Spades come tramping in their thousands into his  distinguished bridal chamber?'
She smiled with pity, and was silent. I could have smacked her down.
·	don't dig this, Suze,' I cried. 'You're a secretary in  that place, you re not even a glamorous model. Why should he want you, of all people, as his front woman alibi?'
 
ABSOLUTE  BEG IN NERS	19
'I think he admires me.'
I glowered her 'You're marrying for loot,' I shouted out. 'With the Spades you were just a strumpet, now you're going to be a whore!'
She poked her determined, obstinate little face at mine. Tm marrying for distinction,' she replied, 'and that's a thing  that you could never give me.'
'No, thatIcouldn't,' I said, very bitterly indeed.
I got up under pretext of spinning a record, pressed my three buttons wildly, and luckily got Ella, who would soothe even a volcano. I walked just a moment to the door,  and  really,  the heat was beginning to saturate the air and hit you.  'This summer  can't last,' said the yobbo behind the Gaggia, mopping his sweaty brow with his sweaty arm.
'Oh yes it can, daddy-o,' I answered. 'It can last till the calendar says stop.'
'No . . .' said the yobbo, gazing meanly up  at  the  black-blue of that succulent June sky.
'It can shine on forever,' I hissed at him, leaning across and ming­ ling with the steam out of his Gaggia. Then Iturned away to go back and talk business with  Suze. 'Tell me about this client,' Iasked her, sitting down. 'Tell me the who, the when, and even, if  you  know it, the why.'
Suze was quite nice to me, now she'd planted her little  arrow  in my lungs. 'He's a diplomat,' she answered, 'or so he says.'
'Does he represent any special country?'
'Not exactly, no, he's over here for some conference, so she told me.'
'She who?'
'His woman, who came in with him to see Henley  and  buy dresses.'
I gazed at Suzette. 'Please tell me a thing I've always wanted to know. How do you go about raising the matter?'
'What  matter?'	·
'That you're an agent for my camera studies.' Suze smiled.
'Oh, it's quite simple, really. Sometimes, of course, they know of me, I mean recommended by other clients. Or else, if not, I just size them up and show them some from my collection.'
 
20	COLIN    MACIN NES	ABSOLUTE  BEG IN NER S	21
 
'Just like that?' 'Yes.'
'And Henley, does he know?'
'I never do it if he's there,' said Suze, 'but I expect he knows.'
'I see,' I said, not pleased somehow by this. 'I see. And what of this diplomat? How do I fix the deal?'
'Do you mind?' was all Suzette answered,  the reason  being that by now I had one of her knees caught between my two. I let go, and said, 'Well, how?'
She opened her square-sac, and handed me a shop-soiled card, which said:
Mickey Pondoroso
12B, Wayne Mews West, London (England), S.W.l.
The address part was in printed copperplate, but the name was written in by hand.
'Oh,' I said, fingering this thing. 'Have you any idea what sort of snap he'll need?'
'I didn't go into any details.'
'Don't sound so scornful, Suze. You're taking my 25 per cent, aren t
you?'
'Have you got it for me in advance?' 'No. Don't come the acid drop.' 'Well, then.'
I got up to leave. She came rather slowly after.
'I'll go out looking for this character,' I said. 'Shall I walk  you back first to your emporium?'
'Better not,' she said. 'We're not supposed  to  bring  our  boy friends near the building.'
'But I'm not,' I said, 'your boy friend any longer.'
'No,' said Suzette. She kissed me quickly on my lips  and ran. Then stopped running, and disappeared at walking pace.
I started off across Belgravia, insearch of Mr Mickey P.
And I must say that, in its way, I rather dig Belgravia: not be­ cause of what the daddies who live 'there think of it, that is, the giddy summit of a mad sophistication, but because I see it as an Olde Englishe  product  like Changing the Guard, or Savile    row
 
suits, or Stilton cheese in big brown china jars, or  any  of those things they advertise in Esquire to make  the  Americans  want to visit picturesque Great Britain. I mean, in Belgravia, the flower­ boxes, and the awnings over doors, and the front walls painted different shades of cream. The gracious living in the red with huge green squares outside the window, and purring hired and diplo­ matic vehicles, and everything delivered at the door  and  on  the slate, and little restaurants where camp creatures in cotton skin­ tight slacks serve half an avocado pear at five bob, cover charge exclusive. All that seems missing from the scene is good King Ted himself. And I never cross this area without thinking it's a great white-and-green theatre with a cast of actors in a comedy I rather admire, however sad it may be to think of.
So there was I, in fact, crossing it in my new Roman suit, which was a pioneering exploit in Belgravia; where they still wore   jackets
·hanging  down  over  what  the  tailors  call  the  seat.  And  around  my neck  hung  my  Rolleiflex,  which  I  always  keep  at  the  ready,  night and  day, because  you  never  know,  a  disaster  might  occur,  like  a plane  crashing  in  Trafalgar  Square,  which  I  could  sell to  the  fish­ and-chip  wrapper  dailies,  or  else  a  scandal,  like  a  personage  seen with  the wrong  kind  of  man  or woman, which  little  Mr  Wiz  would certainly know how to merchandise.
This brought me to Wayne Mews West which, like often in these London backwaters, was quite rural, with cobbles and flowers and silence and a sort of a sniff of horse manure around, when I saw a Vespa cycle with a CD plate on it parked nearby  a recently  built white mews flat, and crouching beside a wooden tub outside a chrome front door, a figure in a mauve Thai silk summer suit who was, would you believe it, watering a fig tree growing in the tub.
I snapped him.
'Hullo there,' he said, looking up and smiling at me. 'You like me to pose for you beside my Vespa?'
'Can't they allot you anything with four wheels?'  I  said.  'You must come from one of those very corrupt, small countries.'
Mr Mickey P. was naturally not pleased. 'I smashed  it  up,' he said. 'It was a Pontiac convertible.'
'This rule of the left we have,' I said, 'is so  confusing.'
'I understand the rules,' said Mr P., 'but got ru n into,  just.'
 


 
22	COLIN     MACIN N ES
'You always do,' I said.
 


'No, sir, never .'
 
ABSOL UTE  BEG IN NERS	23
 
'Do what?'
'Keep still, please, and smile if you like that kind of snap.' I
clicked a few. He stood by his motor-scooter  as if it was an Arab
pony. 'You  always  get  run  into,' Iexplained . 'Its always  the  other feller.'
Mr  Pondoroso  leant  his  scooter  against  the  Wayne  Mews  wall. 'Well, Idon't know,' he said, 'but there are a lot of very bad  drivers in your country.'
Iwound  my  spool.  'And  what  are  they  like  in  yours?'  Iasked him.
'In mine,' he said, 'it doesn't matter, because the roads are wide, and there are fewer autos.'
Ilooked up at him. Iwas curious to find where he came from, but didn't like asking direct  questions,  which  seems  to me a crude way of finding out things that, with  a little patience,  they'll tell you  any­ way.  Besides,  we  were still at the sparring stage that  always  seems necessary with the seniors, whatever their race may be.
'You're a Latin American?' Iasked him.
'Icome from these parts, yes, butIlive in the United States.' 'Oh, yes. You're representing both?'
He smiled his diplomatic smile. Tm in a UNO job,' he said, 'attached. Press officer to the delegation.'
Ididn't  ask which  one it was.  'I wonder,'  Isaid,  'if  Icould  step inside out of this glare to change my spool?'
'To . . . ?'
'Re-charge my camera. As a matter of fact,' I said, eyeing him under the portico, 'I believe I have  to  talk  about  photography to you. Suzette sent me, you met her at Henley's place.'
He looked cautious and blank a moment, then turned on the dip­ lomatic grin again and battered  me  on  the  shoulder.  'Come right in,' he cried, 'I've been expecting you.'
Inside it looked cool and costly-you know, with  glass-topped white metal furniture, oatmeal-stained woodwork, Yank mags and indoor plants and siphons, but as if none of it belonged to him, as in fact I don't suppose it did. 'You have a drink?' he said.
'Thank you, no, I won't,' I told him. 'You don't drink?'
 
He stared at me, holding a bottle and a glass, and genuinely interested in me for the first time, so it seemed. 'Then how do you get by?' he asked me.
I've had to explain  this so often before  to elder brethren, that it's · now almost a routine. 'Idon't use the liquor kick,' Isaid, 'because  I get all the kicksIneed from me.'
'You don't drink at all?'
'Either  you  drink  a  lot,'  Itold  him,  'or  else,  like  me,  you  don't drink  anything  at  all.  Liquor's not  made  for  zips,  but  for  orgies or total  abstinence.  Those  are  the  only  wise  weddings  between  man and bottle.'
He shook his head, and poured himself some deadly brew. 'So you're the photographer,' he said.
Isaw I'd have to be very patient  with  this  character.  'That's me,'
Isaid. 'What  kind  of  print  might  you  be  needing?'  Iwent  on,  not sure yet what kinkiness Ihad to cater for.
He drew himself  up  and flexed  his  torso. 'Oh, Iwould want you to photograph  me.'
'You?'
'Yes. Is that unusual?'
'Well, it is, a-bit-a-little. My clients usually want photographs of models doing this and that . . .'
I was trying to make it easier for the cat. But he said, 'Me,   I
want no models-only me.'
'Yes, I see. And you doing exactly what?' 'In athletic poses,' he replied.
'Just you alone?'
'Of course.' He saw I was still puzzled. 'In my gymnastic uni­ form,' he explained .
He put down his glass and bottle,  and stepped  into the next  room while  I flicked Yank  mags and had  a tonic water. Then out he came wearing-and  I swear I'm  not  inventing this-a white-laced  pair  of navy-blue  basket-ball  shoes,  black  ballet  rehearsal  tights,  a  nude chest  thatched  like  a  Christmas  card,  and,  on  his  head,  a  small, round, racing-swimmer's cap.
'You can begin,' he said.
'How many poses do you want?'
 


 

24	COLIN    MACIN NES
'About a hundred.'
'Seriously? It11cost you quite a lot . . . You want to be doing any­ thing particular, or just poses?'
'I leave this to your inspiration.'
'Okay. Just walk about, then. Do whatever comes  naturally  to you.'
As  I clicked  away,  I worked  out  what  the  most  was  I could  ask him : and I wondered  if he was perhaps  insolvent, or a lunatic, or in trouble  with  the  law,  like  so many  in  the  capital  these  days.  Thie; crazy  Latin-American  number  was  lumbering  all over the  furniture of  his  apartment,  striking  narcissistic  poses,  as  if  he  was  already gloating over  the prints  I'd  give him  of  such a glorious  big hunk  of man.
After a while of this in silence, he  perspiring,  I  chasing  him round clicking like a professor with a bug-net, he grabbed a drink, collapsed into a white shining leather chair, and said, 'Perhaps you can help me.'
'Mr Pondoroso, I thought I was.' 'You call me Mickey.'
'If you say so,' I said to him, playing it cool, and rapidly reloading my apparatus.
'It's like this,' said Mr Mickey P. 'I have  a study to complete  for my organization on British folk ways in the middle of the century.'
'Fine,' I said, snapping him sitting down, his upper belly bulging over his ballet pants, so as to make my hundred quickly.
'Well, I've observed the British,' he said, 'but I've got very few interesting ideas about them.'
'How long have you been observing them?' I asked.
'Six weeks, I think, which I know is not very long, but even so, I just can't quite get perspectives.' Mickey P. peered at me between zips. 'Even the weather's wrong,' he said. 'It's reputed to be cold in the English summer, but just look at it.'
I saw what he meant. An old sun from the Sahar.::. had  crept  up on us unawares, one we weren't at all ready for, and baked us into quite a different loaf from the usual soggy pre-sliced  product.
'Try asking me,' I said.
'Well, let's take the two chief political parties,' he began, and I could see he was winding himself  up for a big performance.
 
ABSOLU TE  BEGIN NERS	25
'No thank you,' I said quickly. 'I don't want to take any part of either.'
His face slipped a bit.
'They don't interest you, is that it?' 'How could they?'
'But  your   destinies,'  he  said,  'are  being  worked   out  by   their
initiatives . . .'	,
I clicked  his unshaven  face in  a close-up horror  picture .   'Who-
ever,' I said, 'is working out my destinies, you  can be quite sure    it's
not those parliamentary numbers.'
'You mustn't  despise politics,'  he told  me. 'Somebody's  got to do
the housekeeping.'
Here I let go my Rolleiflex, and chose my words with care.
'If they'd stick to their housekeeping, which is the only backyrd they can move freely in to any purpose, and  stopped  playmg Winston Churchill and the Great Armada when  there's  no tin soldiers left to play with any more, then no one would despise  them,
because no one would even notice them.'
Mr  Pondoroso  smiled. 'I guess,' he said, 'that fixes the    politi-
cians.'
'I do hope so,' I replied.
'Then  take,'  said  Mr  P.,  'the  Bomb.  What  are  you  going  to do
about that?'
Clearly, I had a zombie on my hands.	. 'Listen,'  I  said  to  him.  'No  one  in_ _ the  world  under  twenty  1s
interested in that bomb of yours one little bit.'
'Ah,' said this diplomatic cat, his face corning all over crafty, 'you may  not  be,  here  in  Europe  I mean, but  what  of  young  peoples  in the Soviet Union and the USA?'
'Young peoples  in the Soviet Union  and the USA,' I told    hi,
clearly   and   very   slowly,   'don't   give   a   single   lump   of   cat s
- shit for the bomb.'
'Easy, son. How you know that?'
'Man, it's only you adult numbers who want to  d;stroy  one another. And I must say, sincerely, speaking as what s  called  a minor, I'd not be sorry if you did: except that you'd probably kill a few millions of us innocent kiddos in the process.'
Mr P. grew a bit vexed.
 

 

26	COLIN  M ACIN N ES
'But you haven't been to America, have you!' he exclaimed. 'Or to Russia, and talked to these young people!'
'Why  do Ihave  to  go,  mister?  You  don't  have  to  travel  to  kuow what  it's  like  to  be  young,  any  time,  anywhere.  Believe  me,  Mr
Pondoroso,_youth is international, just like old age is. We're both very fond of life.'
! do't knw if  what  Isaid was crap, or if anyone in the  universe
thmks it besides  me, but  at all events, it's what  Ihonestly  believe­
from my own observations and from natters I've had with my old Dad.
r P..was loking disappointed  with me. Then he brightened  up a  bit,  r1sed his  brow  eagerly,  and  said,  'That  leaves  us  with  only one topic for an Englishman,  but  a very important one . . . (here the
pronk half rose in his ballet tights and saluted) . . . and that is Her Britannic Majesty the Queen!'	'
Isighed.
.  'No, pleas, not  1?at one,' Isd  to  him  politely  but  very  firmly,
.Really,, that s a sub1ect that we re very, very tired of. One which I
JUst can t work up the interest to have any ideas about at all.'
Mr Pondoroso looked like he'd had a wasted afternoon. He stood up in his gymnastic uniform, which with his movements round the room  had slipped  a bit  to show a fold of  hairy  olive tum   and    he
said to me, 'So you've not much to tell me of Britain and her posi- tion.'	·
'Only,'  Isaid,  'that  her  position   is  that  she  hasn't   found  her position.'
He didnt wig this, so giving me a kindly  smile, he stepped  away to  make  hunself  respectable  again. Iput  a  disc  on  to  his  hi-fi   my choice being_ Billie H.1  who sends me even more than Ella does' but only whe, as now, I'm tired, and also, what with seeing Suze aain, and working hard with  my Rolleiffex  and then  this moronic  conver­ sation, graveyard gloomy. But Lady Day has suffered so much in her
life .she carries  it  all  for  you,  and  soon  Iwas  quite  a  cheerful  cat agam.
'I wish I had this one,' I said, when Mr P. appeared . 'Take it, please,' he told me, beaming.
'Wait till you get my bill for the snaps before you  make me  gifts as well,' I warned him.
 
A BSOL U TE  BEG IN N E RS	27
His only answer, which was rather nice of him, was to put the record in its sleeve and stick it underneath my arm like as if he was posting a letter.
Ithanked  him, and we went  out in the sun. 'When you're tired of your Vespa,' Isaid wittily, 'you can give me that as well.'
Boy, can you credit it, it functioned! 'As soon as my automobile's repaired,' he said, slapping his hand down on the saddle, 'this toy is yours.'
Itook  his  hand.  'Mickey,'  Isaid,  'if  you  mean  that,  you're  my boy. And the photos, need Isay, are complimentary.'
'No, no,' he cried. 'That is another, separate business. For the pictures, I shall pay you cash.'
He darted in. I tried sitting on the scooter saddle for the feel of it, and when he darted out, with this time  his mauve  Thai silk jacket on, he handed me a folded cheque.
'Thank you,' I said, unfolding it. 'But, you know, this isn't cash.' 'Oh. You prefer cash?'
'It's not that, Mickey-it's just  that you said  cash, didn't you, see? But let's look where the branch  is. Victoria  station, lovely. And  Isee it's not one of  the ugly crossed variety, good boy. 111 go there before they put up the shutters, fare you well.'
With  which  Iblew,  reflecting  this,  that  if by  any  fragment  of  a chance he meant  it, that is, about the scooter, and if  Iwanted  to act quick  and  get  the  snaps  developed,  so as to  keep  contact  with  him and  work  on  his  conscience,  if he'd  got  one,  to  secure  the  vehicle, I'd have to go home immediately to my darkroom.
So off  Iset, but  stopping on the way to raid the bank,  which  was getting ready to close as Iarrived, in fact the clerk had half  the door shut, and  he  looked  me  up  and  down,  my  Spartan  hair -do  and  my teenage drag and all, and said just , ' Yes?'
'Yes what?' Ianswered.
'You have business here?' he said to me.
'Ihave,' Itold him.
' Business?' the poverty-stricken pen-pusher repeated. 'Business,' I said.
He still had his hands upon  the  door.  'We're  closing  now,' he told me.
·u my eyes don't  fail  me,' I replied,  ' the clock  above your   desk
 


 
28	COLIN  MACINNES
says 2.56 p.m., so perhaps you'll be kind enough to get back behind it there and serve me.'
He said no more, and made his way  round  inside  the counter, then raised his brows at me across it, and I handed over Mr Pondoroso's cheque.
'Are you,' he said, after examining it as if it was the sort of thing a bank had never seen before, 'the payee?'
'The which?'
'Is,' he said, speaking slowly and clearly, as if to a deaf Chinese lunatic, 'this-your-name-written-on-the-cheque?'
'Jawohl, mein Kapitan,' I said, 'it is.'
Now he looked  diablically crafty.
'And how,' he enquired, 'do I know this name is yours?' I said, 'How do you know it isn't?'
He bit his lip, as the paperbacks say, and asked  me,  'Have  you any proof of your identity?'
'Yes,' I replied. 'Have you of yours?'
!fe shut his eyes, re-opened them and said, 'What proof?'
In the  arse pocket  of  my jeans  here,' I said to  him,  slapping my hdquartrs  briskly,  'I  carry  a  perspex  folder,  with  within  it  my Dnvmg  Licence,  which  is  a  clean  one  I'm  surprised  to  say,  my Blood. Donor's Certificate,  showing  I've  given  two  pints  of  gore  so far thIS year,  and  tatty membership  cards  of  more  speakeasies  and jazz  clubs  than  I  remember.  You  may  look  at  them  if you  really want to, or you could get Mr Pondoroso  on the blower  and ask him t  describe  me,  or,  better  still, you  could  stop playing  games  and
give me the ten pounds your client has instructed you  to  pay  me. that is, unless your till is short of loot.'
To which he answered, 'You have not yet endorsed the document on the back, please.'
I_ scribbld OU my name: He rn:iddled the cheque, began writing on it and said, without lookmg up, I take it you're a minor?'
_'Yes,' I_ said, 'if it's anything to do with anything, I am.' He still said nothmg, and he still didn't hand me over my loot. 'But now    I'm
a big boy,' I continued, 'I don't wet my bed any longer, and  know how to hit back if I'm attacked.'
He gave me the notes as if they  were  two  deformed specimens the Bank happened  to have it was ashamed  of, then  nipped   roun<l
 
A BSOL UTE  BEG I N N ERS	29
his counter and saw me out of the  door,  and  locked  it swiftly on my heels. I must admit this incident made me over-heated, it was all so unnecessary and so old-fashioned, treating a teenager like a kid, and I headed away from Victoria towards  my  home  in  quite  a rage.
I must explain the only darkroom I possess of my own, without which, of course, I'd have to get my printing done commercially,  is at my old folks' residence in Belgravia South, as they call it, namely, Pimlico. As I expect you'll have guessed, I don't like going  there, and haven't lived in the place (except when they're off on their summer seaside orgy) in years. But they still keep what they call 'my room' there, out in the annexe at the back, which used to be the con­ servatory, full of potted flowers.
The family, if you can call it that, consists of three besides myself, plus numerous additions. The three are my poor old Dad, who isn't really all that old, only forty-eight, but who was wrecked and ruined by the 1930s, so he never fails to tell me, and then my Mum, who's much older than she lets on or, I will say this for her, looks cer­ tainly three or four years older than my Dad, and finally my half­ brother Vern, who Mum had by a mystery man seven years before she tied up with my poppa, and who's the number-one weirdie, lay­ about 'and monster of the Westminster city area. As for the numerous additions, these are Mum's lodgers, because she keeps a boarding­ house, and some of them, as you'd expect if you knew  Ma, are lodged in very firmly, though there's nothing my Dad can do about it, apparently, as his spirits are squashed by a combination of my Mum and the 1930s and that's one of the several reasons for which I left the dear old ancestral home.
Mum won't let me have a key and, as a matter of fact, is even tough about giving one to her paid-up boarders, as she likes to see them come and go, even late at night, so though as a matter of fact I've had a key made of my own, in case of accidents, I go  through the form of ringing the front doorbell, just out of politeness, and also to show her I regard myself strictly as a visitor and don't live  there. As usual, although she gets mad if you go down the area steps and knock on the basement door, where she almost  always  is, Mum came out from there into the area and looked up to see who it was, before  she'd come  up the stairs inside and open  the  front door   for
 
 
30	COLIN   MACIN NES
me which she might have done, if she'd been civilized, in the first place.
There she stood, her face lighting up at the sight of  a  pair of slacks, even her own son's, with that sloppy sexy expression that always drove me mad, because, after all, tucked away behind aii those mounds of highly desirable flesh, my Mum has got real brains. But she's only used them to make herself more appealing,  like pepper and salt and garlic on an overdone pork chop.
'Hello, Blitz Baby,' she said.
Which is what she calls me, because she had me in one, in a tube shelter with an air raid warden acting as midwife, as she never  tires of telling me or, worse still, other people in my presence.
'Hullo, Ma,' I said to her.
She still stood there, pink hands with detergent suds on them on her Toulouse-Lautrec hips, giving me that come-hither look she gave her lodgers, I suppose.
'Are you going to open up?' I asked her, 'or should I climb in through your front parlour window?'
'I'll send you down your father,' she answered me. 'I expect he'll be able to let you in.'
This is the trick my Mum has, to speak to me of  Dad  as if he's only m relation, only mine,  that  she never  had  anything whatever to do with (apart, of course, from having had sex with him and even marrying the poor old man). I suppose this is because number one Dad's what known as a failure, though I don't reg.u'd him as on exactly, as anyone could have seen he'd never have succeeded at anything anyway, and number two, to show that her first husband whoever he was, the one who goosed her into producing tha; Category A morbid, my elder half -brother Vernon, was the real man in her life, not my own poor old ancestor. Well, that's her little bit of
feminine psychology: you certainly learn a lot about women from your Mum.
I was kept there waiting a considerable time, so that if it wasn't for the need of my darkroom they'd have never seen me, when Dad appe:Ued with that dead-duck look not merely on his filce, but hangmg on his whole poor old scruffy body, which makes me cle­ ment, because really .he's got a lot of character, and though he's no mmd to speak of, he s read a lot like I do-I mean, tried to   make
 
ABSOLUTE   BEG IN NERS	31
the best of what he's got in a way my Mum hasn't tried to do at all, or even thought of trying. As usual, he opened the door without a word except 'Hullo,' and started off up the stairs again towards his room in the attic portion of the building, which is just an act because he knows, of course, I'll follow him up there for a little chatter, if only for politeness' sake, and to show him I'm his son.
But today I didn't, partly because I was suddenly tired of his per­ formance,  and partly  because  I'd  so much  work to  do immediately inside my darkroom. So out I went and, would you believe it, found that  horrible  old  weirdie  Vernon  had  built  himself  a  cuckoo's nest there, which was something new.
'Hullo, Jules,' I said to him. 'And how's my favourite yobbo?' 'Don't call me Jules,' he said. 'I've already told you.'
Which he has-perhaps 200,000 times or so, ever since I invented the  name  for  h_im,  on  account  of  Vernon =Veme=Jules of  Round the World in Eighty Days.
'And what are you doing in my  darkroom,  Julie?'  I  asked this oafo brother of mine.
He'd got up off the camp bed in the comer-all blankets and no sheets, just like my Vernon-and came over and did an act he's done with monotonous regularity ever since I can remember, namely, to stand up over me, close to me, breathing heavily and smelling of putrid perspiration.
'What, again?' I said to him. 'Not another corny King Kong per­ formance!'
His fist whisked past my snout in playful panto.
'Do grow up, Vernon,' I said to him, very patiently. 'You're a big boy now, more than a quarter of a century old.'
What would happen next would be either that he'd push  me around in which case, of course, it would be just a massacre, except that he knew I'd get in at least one blow that would really cripple him, and perhaps even harm him for life-or else he'd suddenly feel the whole thing was beneath his dignity, and want to talk to me, talk to anyone, in fact, whatever,  since the poor  old  ape was  such    an ff -Certificate product he was really very lonely.
So he plucked at my short-arse Italian jacket with his great big cucumber fingers and said, 'What you wear this thing for?'
'Excuse  me,  Vernon,'  I  said,  edging  past  him  to  unload    my
 
 


32	COLIN M ACINNES	ABSOLUTE   BEGINNER S	33
 
camera on my table. 'I wear it,' I said, taking the jacket off and hanging it up, 'to keep warm in winter, and, in summer, to captivate the chicks by swinging my tail around.'
'Hunh!' he said, his mind racing fast, but nothing coming out except this noise like a polar bear with wind. He looked me up and down while his thoughts came into focus. 'Those clothes you wear,' he said at last, 'disgust me.'
And I hope they did! I had on precisely  my full teenage  drag that would erage him-the grey pointed  alligator casuals, the pink neon  - pair   of   ankle   crepe  nylon-stretch,   my   Cambridge  blue   glove-flt jeans,  a vertical-striped  happy  shirt revealing  my  lucky  neck-charm
on its chain, and the Roman-cut short-arse jacket just referred to . . . not to mention my wrist identity jewel, and my Spartan warrior hair-do, which everyone thinks costs me 17/6d. in Gerrard Street, Soho, but which I, as a matter of fact, do myself with a pair of nail­ scissors and a three-sided mirror that Suzette's got, when I visit her flatlet up in Bayswater, w.2.
'And you, I suppose,' I said, deciding that attack was the best method of defence though oh! so wearisome, 'you imagine you look alluring in that horrible men's wear suiting that you've bought in a marked-down summer sale at the local casbah.'
'It's manly,' he said, 'and it's respectable.'
·1 gazed at the floppy dung-coloured garments  he  had  on. 'Ha!' was about all I said.
'What's  more,' he went  on,  'I've  not  wasted  money  on  it. It's  mv demobilization suit.'	·-· · · ·
My heaven, yes, it looked it-yes!
'When you 've done your military service,' the poor old yokel said, his boot face breaking into a crafty grin, 'you'll be given one too, you'll find. And a decent hair-cut just for once.'  "
I gazed at the goon. 'Vernon,' I said, Tm sorry  for  you. Somehow you missed the teenage rave, and you never seem to  have  had  a youth. To try to tell you the simplest facts of life is just a waste of valuable breath, however, do try to dig this, if your  microbe mini­ brain is capable. There's no honour and glory in doing military service, once it's compulsory. If it was voluntary, yes, perhaps, but not if you're just  sent.'
'The war,' said Vern, 'was Britain's finest hour.'
 
'What war? You mean Cyprus, boy? Or Suez? Or Korea?' 'No, stupid. I mean the real war, you don't remember.'
'Well, Vernon,' I said, 'please believe me, I'm glad I don't. All of you oldies certainly seem to try to keep it well in  mind, because every time I open a newspaper, or pick up a paperback, or go to the Odeon, I hear nothing but war, war, war. You pensioners certainly seem to love that old, old struggle.'
'You're just ignorant,' said Vern.
'Well, if I am, Vern , that's quite okay by me. Because I tell you: not being a mug, exactly, I've no intention of playing soldiers for the simple reasons, first of all, that big armies obviously are no longer necessary, what with the atomic, and secondly,  no one is going  to tell me to do anything I don't want  to, no, or try to blackmail  me with that crazy old mixture of threats and congratulations  that a prank like you falls for because you're a born form-filler, tax-payer and cannon-fodder . . . well, boy, just take a look in the mirror at yourself.'
That left him silent for a while. 'Come on, now,' I said. 'Be a good half-brother, and let me get on with my work. Why have you moved in this room, anyway?'
'You're wrong!' he cried . 'You'll have to do it!'
'That subject's exhausted. We've been into it  thoroughly.  Do forget it.'
'What we done, you gotta do.'
'Vernon,' I said, 'I hate to tell you this, but you really don't speak very good English.'
'You'll see!'
'All right,' I said, ·I'llsee.'
I was trying, as you'll have realized, to drive him  out of  the room, but the boy is sensitive as the end of a truck, and just flopped back on his bed again, worn out by the mental  effort  of  our  conversation. So I put him out of my  mind  and  worked  on  at my snaps in silence, till Dad knocked on the door with two  cups  of  char;  and  standing there in the dark, with only the red light burning, we both ignored that morou, not botheri11g to wonder if he was awake and eaves­ dropping, or dreaming of winning six Victoria   Crosses.
Dad asked me for the  news.
Now,  this  always  embarrasses  me,  because  whatever  news  I   tell
 
34	COLIN    M ACI N N ES
Dad, he always comes back again to his two theme songs of, number
one, what a much better time I have than he had in the 1930s' and' number  two, why  don't  I come back  'home'  again.,-which  is what
Dad really seems to believe this high-grade brothel that he lives in means to me.
'You've found that he's moved in,' said Dad, pointing in the direction of the bed. 'I tried to stop it, but  I  couldn't.  The room's still yours, though, I've always insisted on that all the way along.'
I imagined poor Dad insisting to my Mum. 'What's she put him here for, anyway?' I asked.
'He's been quarrelling with the lodgers,' Dad said. 'There's one of them in particular, doesn't get on with him at all.'
I  didn't  like  to  ask  him  which  or  why.  So,  'And  how's  the  book going?'  I  asked  my  poor  old  ancestor.  Which  is  a  reference  to  a History  of   Pimlico  Dad's  said  to  be  composing,  but  nobody's  ever seen it, though  it  gives  him  the excuse  for getting out of  the house, and  chatting  to  people,  and  visiting  public  libraries,  and  reading books.
'I've reached Chapter 23,' he said.
'When does that take us up to?' I asked him, already guessing the answer.
'The beginning of the 1930s,' he replied.
I gulped a bit of tea. 'I bet, Dad,' I said, 'you give those poor old 1930s of yours a bit of a bashing.'
I could feel Dad quivering with indignation. 'I certainly do, son!' he shouted in a whisper. 'You've simply no idea what that pre-war period was like. Poverty, unmployment, fascism  and  disaster and, worst of all, no chance, no opportunity, no sunlight at the end of the corridor, just a lot of hard, frightened, rich old men sitting on top of a pile of dustbin lids to keep the muck from spilling over!'
I didn't quite get all that, but concentrated.
'It was a terrible time for the young,' he went on, grabbing me. 'Nobody would listen to you if you were less than  thirty,  nobody gave you money whatever you'd do for it, nobody let you live like you kids can do today. Why, I couldn't even  marry  till the  1940s came and the war gave me some sort of a security . . . Just think of the terrible  loss,  though!  If I'd married  ten years  earlier, when  I  was
 
ABSOLU TE  BEG I N N E R S	35
young, you and I would have only had twenty years between us instead of thirty, and me already an old man.'
I thought of pointing out to Dad that if he'd married so much earlier it might have been another woman than my Mum, in which case I wouldn't have existed, or not, at any rate, in my present particular form-but let it go. 'Hard cheese,' I said to him instead, hoping he'd got the subject out of his system for this visit. But no, he was off again.
'Just look around  you, when  you  next  go out!' he cried.  'Just look at any of the 1930s buildings! What they put up today may be ultra­ modern, but at any rate it's full of light and life and air. But those 1930s buildings are all shut in and negative, with landlord and broker's  man written  all over them.'
'Just a minute, Dad,' I said, 'while I hang up this little lot of negatives.'
'Believe me, son, in the 1930s they hated life, they really did. It's
better now, even with the bomb.'
I washed my hands under the hot tap that always runs  cold as usual. 'You're topping it up a bit there, Dad, aren't you?' I said.
Dad  dropped  his  voice  even  lower.  'And  then,  there's  another thing,' he said, '-the venereal.'
'Yeah?'  I  said,  though  I  was  really  quite  a  bit  embarrassed,  be­
cause no one likes much discussing that sort of topic with a Dad like mine.
'Yes,'  he  went  on,  '-the  venereal.   It  was  a  scourge-a  blight
hanging over all young men. It cast a great shadow over love, and made it hateful.'
'It did?' I said..'Didn't you have doctors, then?'
'Doctors!' he cried. 'In those days, the worst types were practic­ ally incurable, or only after years and years of anxiety and doubt . . .' I stopped  my work.  'No kidding?'  I said. 'It was  like that,  then?
Well, that's a thought!'
'Yes. No modern  drugs and quick relief, like now . .  .'
I was quite struck by that, but thought I'd better  change  the subject all the same.
'Then why  aren't you  cheerier,  Dad?'  I said to  him. 'If you   like
the fifties  better,  as you  say you  do,  why  don't  you  enjoy  yourself a bit?'
 
36	CO LI N  M A CIN N ES
My poor old parent gulped. 'It's because I'm too old now, son,' he said. 'I should have had my youth in the Hl50s, like you have, and not my middle-age.'
'Well, it's too late to alter that, Dad, isn't it. But hell,  you're  not yet fifty, you could get out into the world  a bit . . . I  mean, you're not really too old to get a job, are you, and travel around and see what sights there are? Others have d011e it, haven't they?'
My poor  old Pop was silent.
'Why do you stay in this dump, for instance?' I said to him. 'You mean here with your mother? '
'Yes, Dad. Why?'
'He stays because he's afraid to go, and she keeps  him  because she wants the place to look respectable.'
This came from the bed and my charming half-brother Vernon, who we'd quite forgotten, and who evidently had been  listening  to us with both his red ears flapping.
'Ignore him, Dad,' I said. 'He's so easy to ignore.'
'He's nothing to do with me,' my father muttered, 'nothing what­ ever.' And he picked up the cups and made off out of the  room, knocking  things over.
'You,' I said to Vernon, 'are a real number one horror, a real unidentified thing from outer space.'
The trouble  about  Vernon, really, as  I've  said,  is that  he's one of the last of  the  generations  that  grew  up before  teenagers  existed:  in fact, he never  seems to have  been  an  absolute beginner  at  any time at  all.  Even  today,  of  course, there  are  some  like  him,  i.e.,  kids  of the right  age, between  fifteen  or so and twenty,  that  I wouldn't  my­ self  describe  as  teenagers : I  mean  not  kiddos  who  dig the  teenage thing, or  are  it.  But  in poor  Vernon's  era,  the  sad  slob,  there  just weren't  any:  can  you  believe  it? Not  any authentic teenagers  at  all. In those  days,  it  seems,  you  were  just   an  over-grown  boy,  or  an under-grown   man,  life  didn't  seem  to  cater  for  anything  whatever else between.
So I said all this to him.
'Oh,  yeah?'  he  answered  (which he  must  have  got  from  old Clark Gable pictures, like the ones you can see revivals of at the Classics).
'Yeah,'  I  said  to  him .  'And  that's  what  explains  your  squalid
 
ABSOL U TE  BEGI N N E RS	37
downtrodden look, and your groaning and moaning and grouching against society.'
'Is zat so,' he said.
'Zat is, half-brother,' I replied.
I could see him limbering up his brain for a reply: believe me, even I could feel the floor trembling with the effort.
'I dunno about the trouble with me,' my oafo brother finally de- clared, 'but your  trouble is, you have no social  conscience.'
'No what?'
'No social conscience.'
He'd come up close, and I looked into his narrow, meanie eyes. 'That sounds to me,' I said, 'like a parrot-cry  prepackaged  for  you by your fellow squalids of the Ernie Bevin club.'
'Who put you where you are.' 'Which who? And put,me where?'
And now this dear .50 per cent relative of mine came  up  and prodded  my pectorals  with  a stubby, grubby digit.
'It was the Attlee administrations,' said my bro., in his whining, complaining, platform voice, 'who emancipated the working-man , and gave the teenagers their economic privileges.'
'So you approve of me.' 'What?'
'If it was the Ernie Bevin boys who gave us our privileges like you say, you must approve of us.'
'No, I don't, oh no.' 'No?'
'That was an unforeseen eventuality,' he said. 'I mean you kids getting all these high-paid jobs and leisure.'
'Not part of the master-plan?'
'No. And are you grateful to us? Not  a bit of   it.'
There I agreed with him at last. 'Why should  we  be?'  I said. 'Your pinko pals did what they wanted to when they got power, and why should we nippers thank them for doing their bounden duty?'
This  thought,  such  as it  was,  really  halted  him  in _his  tracks.  You could  hear  his  brain  racing  and  grinding  behind  his  red,  crunched face, till he cried excitedly:'You're a traitor to the working-class!'
I took the goon's forefinger, which was still prodding  me  in the torso, and shook it away from me. and said :
 

 
 


 
38	COLIN   MACINNES
'I am not a traitor to the working-class because I do not belong to the working-class, and therefore cannot be a traitor to it.'
'N-h'n!' he really said. 'You belong to the upper-class, I sup- pose.'
I sighed up.
'And you reject the working-classes that you sprung from.' I sighed some more.
'You poor old prehistoric monster,'  I exclaimed.  'I do  not reject the working-classes, and I do not belong to the  upper-classes,  for one and the same simp;e reason, namely, that neither  of  them interest me in the slightest, never  have  done, never  will  do. Do try to  understand  that,  clobbol  I'll)  just  not  interested  in  the   whole
class crap that seems to needle you  and  all  the  tax-payers-  . needle you all, whichever side of the tracks you live on, or suppose you do.'
He glared at me. I could see that, if once he believed that what I said I really meant, and thousands of the kiddos did  the  same as well, the bottom would fall out of his horrid little world.
'You're dissolute!' he suddenly cried out, 'Immoral! That's what I · say you teenagers all arel'
 
A BSOLUTE  BEG IN N ER S	39
and sarcastic, and her closed-for-business look came over her fine face again .
But  I got  in  my body  blow  before  she could.  'And how  is  the
harem-in-reverse?' I said to her. 'Eh?' said my Ma.
'The gigolo lodgers, the Pal Joeys,' I went on, to make my mean­ ing clear.
As if to prove my point, two of them kindly passed by at that moment, making it hard for poor old Mum to flatten me, as I coulJ see by her bitter glare that she'd intended, which was now trans­ formed into a sickly simper, prim and alluring,  that  she turned on like a light for the two beefo Malts who walked between us, oozing virility and no deodorant.
As soon as they'd squeezed by her up the stair, with much exchanging of the time of day, she whipped round on me and said, 'You little rat.'
'Mother should know,' I told her. 'You're too big for your boots,' she said. 'Shoes,' I told her.
In   and  out  she  breathed .	oo  much  spending money,
 
I eyed the oafo, then spoke up slow. Tll tell you one thing about
 
that's your trouble!'
 
--  - ----  - --
 
teenagers,' I said, 'compared with how I remember you ten    years
ago . . . which is we wash between our toes, and change  our vests and pants occasionally, and don't  keep  empty  bottles  underneath our beds for the good reason we don't touch the stuff.'
Saying which, I left the creature; because really,  all this was  such a waste of time, a drag, all so obvious, and honestly, I don't like arguing. If they think that all cat's cock, well, let them think it, and good luck!
I must have been muttering this out aloud along the corridor, because a voice said, over the staircase balustrade, 'Counting your money, then, or talking to the devil? 'and of course it was my  dear old Mum. There she stood, holding the railings, like someone in a Tennessee Williams fllm show. So, 'Hullo, Madame Blanche,' I said to her.
For a moment she started to look flattered, like women do if you say something sexy to them, no matter how intimate it is, so long as they  think  it's flattering to their  egos, until  she saw I was   ice-cold
 
'That's just what's not my trouble, Ma.' 'All you teenagers have.:
- I said, Tm really getting tired of hearing this.:. All right,  e kids have got too much loot to spend! Well, please tell me what you propose to do about it.'
'All that  money,' she said, looking at me  as if  I had  pound  notes
falling out of my ears, and she could snatch them, 'and you're only minors! With no responsibilities to need all  that  spending money for.'
'Listen to me,' I said. 'Who made us minors? '
'What?'
'You  made  us  minors  with  yo_ur  parliamenta ry  whatsits,'  I  told her patiently.  'You thought,  "That'll keep the  little bastards  in their places,   no  legal  rights,   and   so  on,''  and  you   made   us   minors.
·	Righty-o. That also freed us from responsibility, didn't it? Because how can you be responsible if you haven't  any  rights?  And then came the gay-time boom and all the spending money, and suddenly
 
 


 
40	COLIN   M ACI N N ES
you  oldos found  that though  we minors  had  no rights, we'cl got    thf'
 


'Aud why?'
 
A BSOL U TE  BEG IN N E R S	41
 
money  power .  In other  words-,rnd  listen  to  me.  !\fa-though it
wasn't  what  you'd  intended,  admittedly,  you  gave  us  the  money, and you  took  away our  rcspousibility . Fllow me so far? Well, okay!"" You  majors  find  the  laws  you  cooked  up  have  given  you  all  the duties,  and  none  of  the  fun,  and  us the contrary,  and you  don't likP it, do you . Well, as for us, the kids, we do like it, see? We like it fine, Ma. Let it stay that way!'
This left me quite exhausted. Why do I explain it to them, talking like a Method number, if they're not interested in me anyway?
Mum, who hadn't been taking this in (and I mean my  ideas, though she naturally grasped the general gist), now changed her tactics, which made me wary, for she came down the stair in silence and beckoned me into her private parlour, as  in  the old  way she used to for some trouble,  and also as in the old way,  I thought  it best just not to follow her, and take my leave. But she must have guessed this, because she popped out of her parlour again, and caught me with the front door open, and  grabbed  my  sleeve.  'I must speak to you, son,' she said.
'Speak to me outside, then,' I told her, trying to walk out of the door into the street, but she still clutched.
'No, in my room, it's vital,' she kept  hissing.
Well, there we were, practically wrestling on the doorway, when she let go and said, 'Please come in.'
I closed the door, but wouldn't move further than  the  corridor, and waited.
'Your father's dying,' Mum  told  me now.
Now , my first thought was, she's lying;  and  my  second  thought was, even if not, she's trying to  get  at  me,  because  what  does  she care if he lives or dies? She's going to try to make me responsible in some way for something I'm not at all, i.e., the old blackmail of the parents  and all oldies  against the kiddos.
But I was wrong, it wasn't that, she wanted something from me. After a great deal of a lot of  beating  about  the  bush,  she said to me, 'If anything should happen to your  father,  I'd  want  you  to come back here.'
'You'd want me to,' I said. That's all. 'Yes. I'd want you to come back   here.'
 
Because  ! really didn't know.  But  what  gave me the clue   was M um dropping her eyes and looking modest and girlish and bashful, at first I thought for effect, but then I realized it was partly for true, and that for once she just couldn't help it.	·
'You  want  me hack,'  I  said, 'because  you'll  want  a  man  about the
house.'
She mutely acquiesced, as the women's weeklies say.	.
'To keep the dear old place respectable, till you get roamed once again,' I continued on.
Still Ma was mute.
'Because old Vern, your previous product, is such a drp-dry dag that no one would ever take him for the male of the establishment.
I got an eye-flash for that, but still no answer, while our thoughts sparred  up there  in  silence  in the  air, mable to disonnect,    ecause no matter how far you're cut off from a close relation, cut nght off , and eternally severed, there always remains a link of  memory-I mean Mum kneu: a whole  great  deal  about  me,  like  nobody else did, and that held us.	,
'Dad's very much alive,' I said. 'He doesn't look like dying to me  a
bit. Not a bit, he doesn't.'
'Yes, but  I tell you, the doctor's told me  .
·I'll take my instructions  in  that  matter  from  Dad,  and  Dad alone,' I said. 'And  if  Dad  ever  dies, I'll take  my instructjons  from ·
myself .'	.
She could see that was that, and didn't give me, as you might have expected, a dirty look, but a puzzled  one she couldn't control, such as she's given me about six times in my life, as though to say to me, what is this monster I've created?
With which  I blew.
Down by the river,  where  I went  to get  a breather , I stood beside the big new high blocks of glass-built flats, like an X-ray of a stac of buildings with their skins peeled off, and watched the traffic floatmg down the Thames below them , very slow and sure (chug, chug) and oily, 1111derneath the electric railway bridge (rattle, rattle), and pa.st the power-station like a super-c:i11ema with  funnels  stuck  on  it. Peace, perfect peace, though very murky, I decided. Hoot, hoot to you, big  barge,  bon, bo11 voyage.  There was  a  merry  scream, and I
 

 

42	COLIN   M ACINNES
turned about and watched the juveniles, teenagers in bud  as you might call them, wearing their little jeans and jumpers, playing in their kiddipark of Disneyland items erected by the borough  council to help them straighten out their thwarted egos. When  crash! Someone thumped me very painf ully on the shoulder-blades.
I very slowly turned and saw the pasty, scabies-ridden counten­ ance of Edward the Ted.
'Bang, bang,' I said, humouring the imbecile by pointing  my thumb and finger at him like a pistol. 'Bad boy!'
Ed the Ted said nothing, just looked sinister, and stood breathing halitosis on me.
'And what,' I said, 'you doing pounding around down here?' 'I liv ear,' said Ed.
I gazed at the goon.
'My God, Ed,' I cried, 'you can actually talk!'
He came nearer, panting like a hippo, and suddenly twirled a key chain, that he'd been hiding in his fist and in his pocket, till it buzzed like a plane propeller between the two of us.
'What, Ed?' I said. 'No bike-chain? No Bick knife? No iron bar?'
And, as a matter of fact, he wasn't wearing his full Teddy uniform either: no velvet-lined frock-coat, no bootlace tie, no four-inch solid corridor-creepers-only that insanitary hai-do, creamy curls falling all over his one-inch forehead, and his drainpipes that last saw the inside of a cleaner's in the Attlee era. To stop the chain twirling, he tried to grab it suddenly with the same  hand  he  was  spinning it with, hit his own great red knuckles, winced and looked hurt and offended, then fierce and defiant  as he put  the hand  and the  chain in his smelly old drainpipes once again.
'Arve moved,' he said. 'Darn ear.'
'And all the click?' I asked him. 'All the notorious  Dockhead boys?'
'Not v' click,' said Ed-Ted. 'Jus me.'
I should explain (and I hope you'll believe it, even  though  it's true) that Edward and I were  born  and  bred,  if  you  can  call  it that, within a bottle's throw of each other off the Harrow road in Kilburn, and used to run around together in our  short-pant days. Then, when the Ted-thing became all the rage, Edward  signed  up for tlie duration, and joined  the Teddy-boy wolf  cubs, or   whatever
 
ABSOLUTE   BEGINNER S 	43
they're called, and later graduated through  the Ted high  school  up the Harrow road to the full-fledged Teddy-boy condition-slit  eyes, and cosh, and words of one syllable, and dirty finger-nails and all­ and left his broken-hearted Mum and Dad, who  gave three rous­ ing cheers, and emigrated down to Bermondsey, to join a gang. According to the tales Ed told me, when he left his jungle occasion­ ally and crossed the frontier into the civilized  sections  of  the city and had a coffee with me, he lived a high old life, brave, bold and splendid, smashing crockery in all-night caffs and crowning dis­ tinguished colleagues with tyre levers in  cul-de-sacs  and  parking lots, and even appearing in a telly programme on the Ted question where he stared photogenically, and only grunted.
'And why, Ed,' I said, 'have you moved darn ear?' 'Cos me Mar as,' he said. 'She's bin re-owsed.'
He blinked at the effort of two syllables.
'So you still live with Momma?' I enquired.
He beetled at me. 'Course,' he said. ·
'Big boy like you hasn't got his own little hidey-hole?' I asked. Ed bunched his torso. 'Lissen,' he said. 'I re-spek my Mar.'
'Cool,  man,'  I . said.  'Now,  tell  me. What  about  the  mob,    the
click? Have they been re-owsed as well?' 'Ner,' he said.
'Ner? What, then?'
At  this  point,  our  valiant  Edward  looked  scared,  and glancing
round about him at the flat blocks, which towered all round like monsters, he said, 'The click's split up '
I eyed the primitive.
'You I!lean,' I said, 'that bunch of tearaways have thrown you out?'
'Eh-y?' he cried.
'You heard, Ed. You've been expelled from the Ted college?' 'Naher! Me?  Espel me?  Wot?  Lissen! Me, Ar lef  them, see? You
fink I'm sof, or sumfink?'
I shook my head at the poor goof and his abracadabra. 'Do me a favour, Ed,' I said. 'You're scared of the boys, why not admit it? Old-style Teds like you are,  wasted,  anyway:  they've  all  moved out of London to the provinces.'
Edward  the Ted <lid  a little war-dance  on  the  cracked  concrete
paving. 'Naher!' he kept crying, like a ten-year-old.
 


 
44	COLIN.  M ACIN N ES
'The trouble is, Ed,' I said, 'you've tried  to  be  a  man without having been a teenager. You've  tried  to miss  out one of  the flights - of stairs.'
•At the mention of 'teenager', Ed came  to  a  standstill  and  stood there, his body hunched like  a  geat  ingrowing  toe-nail,  staring  at me as if his whole squashed personality  was   spitting.
'Teenagers!' he cried out. 'Kid's stuff. TeenagersJ '
Ijust  raised  my  brows  at  the  poor  slob,  gave  a  little  one-hand one-arm  wave,  and  said  bye-bye.  As  Iwas  crossing  the  yard  bet­ ween  the  house  blocks,  like  an  ant  upon  a  chess-board,  a  hunk  of rock,  clumsily  aimed,  of  course,  thank  heaven,  flew  by  and  hit  the imitation  traction  engine  in  the  kiddi-park.  'Yank!'  Ed  yelled  after me. 'Go ome, Yank!'
Sad.
Up out in Pimlico, the old, old city raised her bashed grey head again, like she was ashamed of her modern daughter down by the river, and I went up streets of dark purple and vomit green, all set at angles like ham sandwiches, until I reached the Buckingham Palace road, so called, and the place where the Air Terminal stands opposite the coach station.
And there, on the one side, were the glamour people setting off for foreign countries, mohair and linen  suits,  white  air-liner  vanity bags, dark sun-spectacles and pages of tickets packed to  paradise, every nationality represented, and everyone equal in  the  sky­ dominion of fast air-travel-and there, on the other side, were the peasant masses of the bus terminal shuffiing along in their front­ parlour-curtain dresses and cut-price tweeds and plastic mackin­ toshes, all flat feet and fair shares and you-in-your-small-corner-and - 1-in-mine; and then, passing down the  middle  of  them,  a troop  of toy soldiers, all of them with hangovers after nights of rapture down on the Dilly, and wearing ladies' fur muffs on their heads and sweaty red jackets that showed their vertebraes from neck to coccyx, and playing that prissy little pipe m usic like a bird making wind-and I thought, my God, my Lord, how horrible this country is,  how dreary, how lifeless, how blind  and busy over  trifles!
After which, feeling maybe it perhaps  was me, I walked  into   the
little square behind the terminal, where there was the usual assort­ ment  of  mums  and prams  and bubble-blowing  occupants,  and old
 
ABSOLU TE  BEGIN NE RS	45
men with  boots  and dandruff,  and rolled  fags with  the tobacco ·drip­ ping out at the ends, and Isat down on a wood bench beneath  enor­ mous planes,  they must  have been, with  decorative beds and even a fountain,  which   is  practically   unknown   in   England,  where  they always  remember  to  tum  the  taps  off  and  economize  with  water, and  noticed  that  hosing  away  there  was  a  West  Indian  gardener, surrounded by a swarm of  kids, all pulling at his hose,  and he doing the benevolent  adult performance  1must say very well, and also the coloured man at ease among the hostile natives.
Now  myself,  I've nothing  against  kids,  Irealize  that  they  have  to be so that the race can continue, but  Ican't  say that  Ilike them,  or approve  of  them.  In  fact,  Imistrust  them,  and  consider  they're  a menace,  because  they're  so  damned  wilful  and  energetic,  and,  if you  ask  me,  in  spite  of  their  charming  little  childish  habits,  they know perfectly  well what  they're  up to; and see they get it,   nd one day, mark  my words,  we'll  wake  up  and  find the  little horrors  hae risen  in the  night  and  captured  the  Bank  of  England  and  Bucking­ ham  Palace  and  the  BBC.   But  this  West  Indian,  he  must  have  had paternal  instincts,  or  something,  or  been  trained  as  a  lion-tamer, because  he  handled  these  little  atom  bombs  without  effort,  either kidding  them  so that  they  all  screamed  with  laughter  (and  him  as well), or else cracking down  on them  in a fury, and getting immedi­ ate results. And all between  this, and the hosing, he'd  say a word  or two to the mums  and the old  geezers, flaunting his  BWI  charms, for which  I don't blame  him,  but  was  also attentive to the  old  chatter­ boxes of both sexes, till everyone I do declare actually beamed.
In fact, this coloured character struck me as so bloody civilized .
With which - thought, I heaved myself up, there in that  scented garden in the height of summer, feeling oh! so somehow saddened, and caught myself a bus. It took  me  across  London  to my manor in the area of w.10 and  11.
I'd  like to explain  this  district  where  I live, because  it's  quite a
curiosity, being one of  the few that's  got left behind  by  the  Welfare era and the Property-owning whatsit, both of them, and is, in fact, nothing more thap a stagnating slum. It's dying, this bit of London, and that's the most important  thing  to remember  about  what  goes on there. To the north of it, there run, in parallel, the Harrow road I've  mentioned,  which  you'd  hurry  through  even  if  you  were  in   a
 


 
46	COLIN   MACINNES
car, and a canal, called the Grand Union, that nothing  floats on except cats and contraceptives, and the main  railway  track  that takes you from London to the swede counties of the West of Eng­ land. These three escape routes, which  are all at different  heights and levels, cut across one another at different points, making crazy little islands of slum habitation shut off from the world by concrete precipices, and linked by metal bridges. I need hardly mention  that on this north side there's a hospital, a gas-works with enough juice for the whole population of the kingdom to commit suicide, and a very ancient cemetery with the pretty country name  of  Kensal Green.
On the east side, still in the w.10 bit, there's another  railway,  and a park with a name only Satan in all his splendour could  have thought up, namely Wormwood Scrubs, which has a prison near it, and another hospital, and a sports arena, and the new telly  barrack!. of the BBC, and with a long, lean road called Latimer road which I particularly want you to remember, because out of this road, like horrible tits dangling from a lean old sow, there hang a  whole festoon of what I think must  really  be the  sinisterest  highways in our city, well, just listen to their names: Blechynden, Silchester, Walmer, Testerton and Bramley--<:an't you just smell them, as you hurry to get through the cats-cradle of these blocks? In this part, the houses are old Victorian lower-middle tumble-down, built I dare say for grocers and bank clerks and horse-omnibus  inspectors who've died and gone and their descendants evacuated tQ... the outer sub­ urbs, but these houses live on like shells, and there's only one thing to do with them, absolutely one, which is to pull them down till not a one's left standing up.
On the south side of this area, down by the w.11, things  are  a little different, but in a way that somehow makes them worse, and that is, owing to a freak of fortune, and some smart work  by the estate agents too, I shouldn't be surprised, there are one or two sections that are positively posh: not fashionable,  mind  you, but quite graded, with their big back gardens and that absolute silence which in London is the top sign of a respectable location. You walk about in these bits, adjusting your tie and looking  down  to  see if your shoes are shining, when-wham! suddenly you're back in the slum  area  again-honest,  it's  really  startling,  like  where  the   river
 
ABSOLUTE  BEG IN NERS	47
joins on to the shore, two quite different creations of dame nature, cheek by thing.
Over towards the west, the frontiers aren't quite  as definite,  and the whole area merges into a drab and shady and semi-respectable part called Bayswater, which I would rather lie in my coffin, please believe me, than spend a night in, were it not for Suze, who's shacked up there. No! Give me our London Napoli I've been describing, with its railway scenery, and crescents that were meant to twist elegantly but now look as if they're lurching high, and huge houses too tall for their width cut up into twenty flatlets, and front  faades  that  it never pays anyone to paint, and broken milk bottles everywhere scattering the cracked asphalt roads like snow, and  cars parked  in the streets looking as if they're stolen or abandoned, and a strange number of male urinals tucked away such as you find nowhere  else in London, and red curtains, somehow, in all the windows, and diarrhoea-coloured street lighting-man,  I  tell you,  you've only  got to be there for a minute to know there's something radically wrong.
Across this whole mess there cuts, diagonally, yet another rail­ way, that rides high above this slum property  like a scenic  railway at a fair. Boy, if you want to admire our wonderful old capital city, you should take a ride on this  track  some time!  And  just  where this railway is slung over the big central road that  cuts  across the area north to south, there's a hole, a dip, a pocket, a really unhappy valley which, according to my learned Dad, was formerly  at  one time a great non-agricultural marsh. A place of evil, mister. I bet witches lived around it, and a lot still do.
And what about the human population? The answer is, this is the residential doss-house of our city. In plain words, you'd not live in our Napoli if you could live anywhere else. And that is why there are, to the square yard, more boys fresh from the nick, and national refugee minorities, and out-of-business whores, than anywhere else, I should expect, in London town. The kids live in the streets-I mean they have charge of them, you have to ask permission to get along them even in a car-the teenage lot are mostly of the Ted variety, the chicks mature so quick there's scarcely such a thing there as a little girl, the men don't talk, glance at you hard, keep moving, and don't stand with their backs to anyone, their women are mostly out of sight, with dishcloths I expect for yashmaks, and there  are
 


 
48	COLIN    MACIN NES
piles  and  piles  of  these  dreadful,  wasted,   negative,   shop-soiled kind of old people that make you feel it really is a tragedy to grow grey.
You're probably saying well, if you're so cute, kiddo, why do you live in such  an  area? So now,  as a certain  evening paper  writes it, 'I will tell you.'
One reason is that it's so cheap. I mean, I have a rooted objection to paying rent at all, it should be free like air, and parks, and   water. I don't think I'm mean, in fact I know I'm not, but I just can't bear paying more than a bob or two to landlords. But .the real reason,   as I expect you'll have already guessed, is that, however horrible the area is, you're free there! No one, I repeat it, no one, has ever asked me there what I am, or what I do, or where  I came from,  or  what my social group is, or whether I'm educated or not,  and  if there's one thing I cannot  tolerate  in this world,  it's nosey  questions. And
, what is more, once the local bandits see you're making out, can earn your living and so forth, they don't swing it on you in the slightest you're a teenage creation-if you have loot, and can look after yourself, they treat you as a man, which is what you are. For in­ stance, nobody in the area would ever have treated me  like  that bank clerk tried to in Belgravia. If you go in anywhere, they take it for granted that you know the scene. If you don't,  it's  true they throw you out in pieces, but if you do, they treat you just as one of them.
The room I inhabit in sunny Napoli, which overlooks both . rail­ ways ( and the foulest row of backyards to be found outside the municipal compost heaps), belongs to an Asian character called Omar, Pakistani, I believe, who's regular as clockwork-in fact, even more so, because clocks are known to stop-and turns up on Satur­ day mornings, accompanied by two countrymen who act as body­ guards, to collect the rents, and you'd better have yours ready. Because if you haven't, he simply grins his teeth and tells his fellahin to pile everything you possess neatly on the outside pavement, be it rain, or snow, or mulligatawny fog. And if you've locked the door, it means absolutely nothing to him to smash it down,  and  even if you're in bed, all injured  innocence and indignation, he still  comes in with his sickly don't-mean-a-thing kind of smile. So  if you're going to be away, it's best to leave the money with a friend, or better
 
A BS O LUTE  BEGINNER S	49
still, pay him, as I do, monthly in  advance.  And  when  you  do, he takes out a platic bag on a long chain from a very inner pocket, and tucks the notes away, and says  you  must  have  a  drink  with  him some time, but even when I've once or twice met him in a pub, he's never offered  it, of course. Also, if  you  make any complaint  whatever
-I  mean , even  that  the  roof s falling  in,  and  the  water  cut  off-he smiles that  same smile and does positively  sweet bugger-all  about  it. On  the  other  hand,  you  could  invite  every  whore  and  cut-throat  in the city in for a pail  of  gin, or give a corpse accommodation  for the night  on the  spare bed, or  even  set the bloody  place  on fire,  and  he wouldn't  turn  a  hair-or  turn  one  if  anybody  complained  to  him about  you.  Not  if  you  paid  your  rent,  that  is.  In fact,  the  perfect landlord.
The tenants come and go, as you might expect, but among the regular squatters I have a few particular buddies , of whom I'd specially name the following three.
The first of them, on the floor below me (I'm on the top), is a boy called The Fabulous Hoplite. I'm hoping you'll not  scoff  at  his name, because Hoplite would certainly not care for it if you did, as he's a most sensitive and dignified character, who  was  formerly  a male whore's male maid, if the truth be told, but  has  now  retired from that particular scene. According to report, the Hoplite has been in business with some of the city's  top  poof  raves,  and  was  even more in demand by the gentry than the costly glamorosos he'd shacked up with. How I know him, is  on  account  of  his  being  a friend of Wiz's who he admires (but nothing doing), and it was through them that I actually  got my  room.  What  the Hoplite  does for a living now, apart from a bit of free-lancing on the side when conditions get too rough, is act as contact man for various gossip columnists, because though you might not think this credible, con­ sidering his background , Hoplite gets around on the Knightsbridge­ Chelsea circuit in quite an important way, no  doubt  owing to  his being very handsome in an elfin, adolescent sort of style, and cer­ tainly very witty, or should I say sharp-tongued, but most of all, because he"s really very friendl y: I mean, he really does like people, which a lot  of  people  think  they  do,  but  which  it  seems,  as a matter of  fact, is really very  rare.
Next,  on  the  first  floor,  is  in  fact  the  best  room,  but  I somehow
 


 
50	f:O L I N   M A CI N N ES
don't think he'll last there,  on  account  of  really  critical  moments with Mr Omar, is a young coloured kid called  Mr Cool  (which  I need hardly say is not his baptismal nam e, I don't suppose). Cool is a local product, I mean born and  bred  on  this  island  of  both  races and he wears a beardlet , and  listens  to the  MJQ,  and  speaks  ver; low, and blinks his big eyes and occasionally  lets  a  sad,  fleeting smile cross his kissable lips. He's certainly younger than I am, but he makes me feel about nine or so he's so very poised and paternal, though what the hell he does to keep himself  in MJQ  LPS  I haven't an idea-I really haven't . I don't think it's anything illegal, which is what you might expect, because the kid is always so skint, he's only one suit (a striped Italian black), and no furniture to speak of except for his radiogram, so that either business, whatever it may be, is bad, or else, for reasons best known,  he's covering  up.
I miss out various rooms and floors, and come now to my particu­ lar pal, who lives in the basement and really is a horror, called Big Jill. Now Jill is a Les. and, what is more, you may not believe this, but a Les. ponce, that is to say, she keeps a string of idiotic chicklets on the game, and just sits back in her over-heated, over-decorated, over cooking-smelling basement and collects. She's in all day,  and goes out as sun sets to an overnight club where she's behind the counter, and holds her court among her  little  Les.-ette  fans. And then, in the  wee  small  hours, she has  a way, when  she comes  home, of stopping in the area before she goes in and yelling at the upper windows at the Hoplite or myself, to ask if we want to come down and have anything to eat. Which, as a matter of fact, we quite often do, not really for the food, but because old Jill is very wise, in spite of being not far in her twenties, and is my chief and only confidant about Suzette who I ask her advice about but, as I need hardly tell you, haven't produced for her inspection, for  all my  contacts  with Suze are at her  place  over there  in w.2.
So by now, of course, I had arrived there, and shot up the flights of no-lino stairs, which nobody keeps swept and ever lit (and the front door's always open) into my loft, which is one big room right across the whole top of the establishment, plus bathroom on the landing minus a bath (I use the municipal), but with basin and a convenient. And I've decorated it all in what I call anti-contemp­ tuous style, i.e., ancient aunt Fanny wallpapers  I got from some left-
 
A BSOLUTE  BEGIN N E RS	51
overs  in  a paint  shop in the Portobello  road.  I've got  a bed,  too, a
-triple one, and the usual chair and table; but no other chairs, and instead  a lot of  cushions  spread out on the floor  and on top of    what is my only luxury, a fitted carpet. My clothes I hang on ropes with polythene covers for the BR soot, the rest I keep in  my  metal cabin trunk. I don't have curtains because I like to  look  out,  specially at night, and I'm too high for anyone to look  in. The only  other objects are my record-player , my pocket transistor radio, and stacks of discs and books that I've collected, hundreds of them, which every New Year's Day I have a pogrom of,  and  sling  out  everything  except a very chosen few.
I was having a wash  down,  at the  bathroom  sink, when  up came the Hoplite, nervously patting his hair which was done in a new style of hair-do like as if a large animal had licked the Hoplite's locks down flat, then licked the tip of them over his forehead vertical up, like a cockatoo with its crest on  back-to-front.  He was wearing a pair of skin-tight,  rubber-glove  thin,  almost  transparent  cotton slacks, white nylon-stretch and black  wafer-sole casuals, and a sort of maternity jacket, I can only call it, coloured blue. He looked over my shoulder into the  mirror,  patting  his  head  and  saying  nothing, till when  I said nothing too, he asked me,   'Well?'
'Smashing, Hoplite,' I said. 'It gives you a rugged, shaggy, Burt Lancaster appearance.'
Tm not so sure,' the Hoplite said, 'it's me.'
'It's you, all right, boy. Of course, anything is, Fabulous. You're one who can wear anything, even a swimsuit or a tuxedo, and look nice in it.'
:1 know you're one of my fans,' the Hoplite said, smiling sadly at me in the mirror, 'but don't mock.'
'No mockery, man. You've got dress sense.'
The Hoplite sat down on the lavatory seat, and sighed. 'It's not dress sense I need,' he said, 'but horse sense.'
I raised my brows and waited.
'Believe it or not, my dear,' the Hoplite continued sadly, 'but your old friend Fabulous, for the first time in his life-the very first in nineteen years (well, that's a lie, I'm twenty, really)-is deep, deep, deep in love.'
'Ah,' I replied.
 


 
52	COLI N   M A CI N N ES
There was a pause.
' You're not going to ask me with who?' he said, appealingly. Tm so sure you're going to tell me, Hop.'
'Sadist! And not Hop, please!'
'Not me. No, not a bit, I'm not. Well-who is it?' 'An Americano.'
'Ah.'
'What does this "Ah" mean?' the Hoplite said suspiciously.
'Several things. Tell me more. I can see it coming, though. He doesn't care.'
'Misery! That's it.'
'Doesn't care for the angle, Hoplite, or doesn't care for you personally, or just doesn't care for either?'
'The angle. Not bent at all, though I had hopes that perhaps he dabbled . . . And he's so, so understanding, which makes  it  so,  so, so much worse.'
'You poor old bastard,' I said to the  Hoplite,  as he  sat there  on my john, and almost crying.
He plucked at a piece of sanitary tissue, and blew his uose. 'I only hope,' he said, 'it doesn't turn me anti-American.'
'Not  that,  Hoplite,'  I  said.  'Not  you.  It's  a  sure  sign  of    total
I defeat to be  anti-Yank.'
'But  I thought,'  said  lovelorn  Fabulous,  rising from his seat  and
strolling across to gaze out on the railway  tracks,  'you  didn't approve of the American influence. I mean, I. know you don't care for Elvis, and you do like ,TommY:'
'Now  listen,  glamour  puss,'  I  said,  flicking  his  bottom  with  my towel.  'Because  I  want  English  kids  to  be  English  kids,  not  West Ken  Yanks  and  bogus  imitation  Americans,  that  doesn't  mean  I'm anti the whole us thing. On the contrary, I'm starting up an anti-ati­ American  movement,  because  I just  despise the hatred  and jealousy of  Yanks  there  is  around,  and  think  it's  a  sure  sign  of  defeat  and weak11ess.'
'Well,  :at's  a relief,' said Fabulous , a bit  sarcastically.  So, really to hurt him, I made as if to use my towel again, and didn't.
'The thing is,' I said,  'to  support  the  local  product. America launched  the  teenage  movement,  there's  no   denying,   and  Frankie S., after all, was,  in his way, the very  first teenager.  But  we've  got  t-;;
 
A BSOL U TE  BEG I N N E R S	53
produce om own variety, and not imitate the Americans-or  the Ruskis, or anybody, for that matter.'
'Ah, the Russians,' said the Hoplite, with a dreamy look coming
over his pretty countenance. 'You think they have  teenagers over there as well?'
'You bet they have,' Isaid. 'Haven't you talked to any of  the boys
who've been over for the Congresses? They've got them just like us. But where the Russians fail, is sending us propaganda, and not sending us anyone in the flesh to look at, or to talk to.'
The Hoplite was getting a bit bored, as he does when it goes  off the gossip kick into ideas. 'You're such a clever boy,' he said, patting me on the shoulder, 'and such a hard judge of the rest of us poor mortals . . . And deep down, I do believe, you're quite a patriot.'
'You bet I'm a patriot!' I exclaimed.  'It's  because  I'm  a patriot, that I can't bear our  country.'
The Hoplite wa,s  at the  door. 'If you're  interested  at  all,' he  said,
'there's a party tonight, mine hostess being Miss Lament.'
Tm not sure I care for that gimmicky girl,' I said. 'What sort of party-is  it  special?'
Dido  Lament,  I  should  explain,  is  a female columnist,  and that
actually is her·name, or rather, her maiden name. Lament is known among us kids because she did a big investigation round the coffee bars in the days whe11the  Rock thing first broke,  and  got taken   up
. by all her clients in High Society-or  rather,  by  the  bus-queue masses who read about them in her column.
'Oh, the  usual  sw3 trash,'  said  Hoplite,  waving  his  hands about
disdainfully, though I know full well he just couldn't wait to go. 'Advertising people, and television people, and dressmaking  people and  show-business  fringe  people-all  the  parasites,'   he  said. 'Henley, I know, is going, and have reason to believe,  is taking   Suze.'
'He is?' I said, showing no sign of grief to this bit of  pure cam­ posity  called Hoplite.
'And  Wizard  should  be  there,'  he  went  on,  'up  to  no  good,   I
doubt not, the dear lad . . .'
'You  STUDS   UP  THERE!'  came  a  great  yell  from  the  stairs. 'Come
down and see your doll!'
This was Big Jill from her basement sector.
'Oh!' Hoplite cried. 'I do wish that female talent-spotter wouldn't
 

 
 


 
54	COLIN   M ACIN NES
shout sol Go to her if you want to, child, but me,  I've  got much better things to do.' And blowing me a kiss, he tripped off down the stairs, very sadly singing.
'Five minutes, Jill girl!' I yelled over the top of them.
Because, first of all, I wanted to glance at a snap of Suze that was taken of us both one day up on top of the Monument  there  in the City by a kid I handed my Rolleiflex to,  to  snap  us,  and which shows us she standing in front, and me standing round behind her, holding her arms, and looking over her head just after kissing her on the neck. And as I wandered  round, putting on a garment here,   and a garment there, I carried this photo, and propped it up somewhere when I had to use both hands, and gazed at the bloody thing and thought 'Oh Christ, it was only just one single summer ago,  what's the use of being young if you're not loved? Well, all right-what is the use? What is it? Or is that obvious, I mean my question?'
So that was that, and down I went to see Big Jill.
But on the first Boor landing, opposite Mr Cool's room, I noticed the door was left open, which was a sign I know that Cool had something he'd like to say to me, but was too dam proud  to ask  me to step in. If it had been anyone else, I would have just let the hint lie dropped there where it lay, but  with  the coloured  boys  you've got to be so careful, or otherwise they put it down to prejudice. So I put my head around the door, and jeepers-creepers, nearly had a fit because would you believe it, there were two  Mr  Cools, one coloured, and one white, or so it seemed.
'Oh, hi,' said Mr Cool, 'this is my brother, Wilf.'
'Hi,Wilf,' I said. 'That's crazy!' 'What is?' said this Wilf.
'You being the brother  of  my favourite  Mr  Cool. It nearly shook
me rigid when I saw the pair of you.'
'Why did it?' said this white-skinned number, who struck me, I must  say, as not  being  at  all a swinging  character  like his  brother
-in fact, quite un-cool.
'Wilfs on his way,' said Mr Cool.
'Yem,' said this Wilf, and 'see you.' And he shook hands with his brother, and went out past  me with  not  so much  as  a genuflection or a curtsy.
As soon as he'd gone, I said, 'Cool, please  excuse me, but  I   don't
 

ABSOLUTE   BEGIN NERS

quite dig the scene. I was quite polite to your brother, wasn't I? but he just didn't want to know.'
Mr Cool was standing very still, and very lean, and very all-by- himself, and said, 'My brother's come to warn me.'
'Of what? News me up, please.'
'Wilfs Mum's by another man, as you'll have guessed.' 'Well . . . Yes . . . So . . . ?
'He doesn't like me much, and my friends he likes even less, specially my white ones.'
'Charming! Why, please?'
'Let's not go  into  that.  But  anyway,  he  gets  round  the  area and knows the scene, and he says there's trouble coming for the coloureds.'
I laughed out loud, but a bit nervously. 'Oh Cool, you know, they've been saying that for years, and nothing's happened. Well, haven't they? I know in this country we treat the coloureds all like you-know-what, but we English are too lazy, son, to be violent. Anyway, you're one of us, big boy, I mean home-grown, as much a native London kid as any of the millions, and much more so than hundreds of pure pink numbers from Ireland and abroad who've latched on to the Welfare thing, but don't belong here like you do.'
My speech made no impression on Mr Cool. Tm just telling you what Wilf says,' he answered. 'And all I know is, he likes coming here so little it must be something that makes him feel he ought to.'
'Perhaps your mother told him to,' I suggested, because I always like to think that someone's female parent has maternal instincts.
He shook his head. 'No, it was Wilfs idea,' he said, 'to come.' I looked hard at Mr Cool.
'And if anything should happen,' I asked, 'whose side would your brother himself be on?'
Mr Cool blew out some smoke and said, 'Not mine. But he felt he had to coipe and tell me.'
As I stood there looking at the Cool, it struck me so hard how absolutely lonely the poor fucker was-standing there all on his Pat Malone, and yet so resolute, so touch-me-if-you-dare . . . And the nasty question grew up also in my mind as  to  what  I might be doing if there should be trouble  here  in  Napoli-I,  the  sharp  kid, the pal of the whole wide world. Were those really my principles,
 


56	COLIN   M ACIN N ES	A BSOLUTE  BEGINNERS	57
 
or was  it all on top? And although  Iknew it was the wrong thing to say,  and  knew  it  positively  at  the  very  moment,  Ifound  myself saying  to  Cool,  'Tell  me,  Cool,  you're  not  short  of  anything,  are you?Imean,Icouldn't help you out with any loot?'
He  just  shook  his  head,  which  was  quite awful,  and  Iwas  really relieved  that  Big Jill  hooted  up  the  stairs-much  louder,  this  time, was only two floors away-'STuo! Are you coming down to me?'
'Coming, doll,' Ishouted and, with  a wave  to Cool, went  down  to Jill in her nether regions.
It needs a bit of  an effort of  imagination  to see what  the little Les. butterflies  see  in  Jill  because  she  is,  to  say  the  very  least  of  it,  so massive,  and though  Iknow  she's blatant  and  masterful  and  all the rest  of  it,  and  wears  slacks,  of  course,  and  even  would   do  to  a wedding  at  St. Paul's,  I'm  sure, she isn't beautiful  in  any way  that  I can see, or even glamorous. In fact, if it wasn't she's a city girl, you'd somehow  imagine her  handling horses-and  perhaps,  come to think of it, that is the appeal to the young chicks.
'You're late,' she said, 'you horrid little studlet.'
'What do you mean, "late", Big Jill? Did you and  me  have  any sort of an appointment?'
She grabbed me abruptly like an ourang-outang, lifted me two feet off the floor, and banged me down again. 'If you were a chick,' she said, 'I'd eat you.'
'EASY,   lady-killer,'   Icried.   'You'll   get   me   entangled   in   your cactuses.' Because  it's true Jill is a great collector of  indoor plants,  in fact they sprout and dangle all over her basement  rooms, and in the area as well.
She pushed a cup of coffee in my hands and said,  'Well, how's your sex life, junior, since the last time we met?'
'We met two days ago, Big Jill. It hasn't changed since then.' 'No? Nothing to report?'
Big Jill was standing looking at me, legs apart, with that sort of kindly, 'understanding' look that irritates you when the person just doesn't dig anything whatever about your inner character and pursuits.
'You  don't  understand   as  much  as  you  think,  Big  Jill,'  Isaid, voicing my thoughts  to her.
'Oh!' she said huffily. 'Please pardon me for existing.'
 
'All that I mean, dear,' I said, to soften up the absurd old cow, 'is that your  attitude to all those kicks  is much  too expert. You  know so dam m uch, you know so dam little.'
Big Jill now dropped the wise old elder sister  thing,  and said, 'Clue me then, teenager. My big ears are flapping.'
'All  Imean,  Big Jill, is that  you  can't  say, "How's your  sex life?" just  like you say, ''How's the weather?" '
She sat down wrong way round on the chair,  with  her  arms resting on the back of it, and her big tits resting on her arms. 'Obviously,' she said.
'The whole thing about sex,' Isaid to her, 'is that  it's all very easy, and all very difficult indeed.'.
'Ah . . .'  said  Big  Jill,  looking  tolerant  and  amused,  as  if  Iwas putting on a show for her.      ·
'I mean, anyone can have a bash, that's obvious, there's nothing to it, but is there any pleasure?'
'Well, isn't there, big boy?' she asked me, giving  a  great,  fat smile.
'Oh, of course there is, in that way, yes, but there isn't really, be­ cause you can't have it just like that without messing something else that matters up, and this brings you badly  down.'
'Even   if   you  like  the  party   of   the  second  part,  it  brings  you down?' said Jill, getting inte,rested, as Icould see.
'If  you  like  the  other  number,  Imean  like  the  looks  of  them,
really  dig them  sexually-and  Imean  really-then  it  isn't  quite  so bad, because  at least you're only acting like a pair  of  animals, which isn't  a bad  thing to do . . . But  even  then,  you're  still wrought  badly down.
'Wrought down because you might lose them?'
'No, no, not that. Because you've not  really  got  them, because they aren't the person.'
'What person?'
'The person you really dig, with all of  yourself,  your  other  half you'd give your  life to.'
'You're not referring to marriage, are you?'
'No, no, no, no, no, Big Jill.' 'To love?'
' Yep. That's it. To it.'
 

 
58	COLIN   M A CI N N ES
Big J.'s eyes were pale, so that she seemed to be staring into her- self, and not out into the room at me.	·
'You ever had that combo?' she enquired. 'No.'
'Not even with Suzette?'
'No. Me, yes, I was ready for that everything stage of it, but for Suze it was only a head, bodies and legs thing, when it happened.'
Big Jill looked wise, and said, 'So it was really  you  who broke   it
up, then.'
'I suppose you could say so, yes. I wanted more from Suze than she wanted to give me, and I just couldn't bear anything that was less.'
'Then why you still trail round after her? You hope she'll change?' 'Yes.'
Big  Jill  heaved  herself  up,  and  said,  'Well,  boy,  Ican  tell  you something,  which  is she won't,  Suzette. Not  for ten  or fifteen  years she won't,  anyway,  Ican  promise  you  that.  Later  on, when  you're both  a  big  boy  and  girl,  you  might  be  able  to  wrap  a  big  thing up . . .'
I'd moved away, and was looking out into her area Kew  gardens. 'If I can work up the strength of will,' I said, Tm going to cut out seeing Suze at all.'
'Don't tum your back when you're talking, son. You mean live on your visions like a monk?'
I turned round and said, 'I mean shut my gate  to  all  that nonsense.'
Big Jill came over too. 'You're too young for that,' she said. 'If you do, you'll only do yourself an injury. You shouldn't give up kicks till they don't mean a thing to you any more.' But she was quite a bit edgy, I could see. 'You're a 'romanticl ' she said. 'A second feature Romeo!' and she took back my  coffee cup as if I'd tried  to rob  her of it.
Well, there it is. That's what always happens if you try to tell the truth, they always want to know it, and nag you and persuade you against your better sense to tell it, and then they're  always  angry with you when they hear it, and dislike you for it. And, as a matter of fact, it wasn't even the truth I'd told Big Jill, in one respect : and that is, Suze and I hadn't made it, actual1y, though we'd sailed   right
 
ABSOLUTE  BEGINNERS	59
up close so often. But even when the scene was set, and we both meant business, it hadn't happened,  and  I'm  not  sure  if  the  real rea on for this was her, or me.
I thought  of  all this,  as I climbed  out of  Napoli  into London, up towards N. Hill Gate. And straining up the Portobello road,Ipassed   a crocodile of infants, and among them  a number of little Spadelets, and I noticed,  not for the first time, how, in the  undergrou nd move­ ment of the juveniles,  they hadn't been educated up yet to the colour thing. Fists and wits, they were what mattered,  and the only enemy was  teacher.  And  as  I  walked  on  along  the  Bayswater  road,  just inside that two miles of  gardens, so pretty and kind by day (but  not by night), I went on thinking, as my Italian casuals carried me on.
Perhaps  Big  Jill's  right,  I think  too  much,  but  the  sight  of  these school-kids  reminded  me of  the man  who really  taught  me to think at all, and that was my elementary schoolmaster,  cal1ed  Mr Barter. I know  it's  un-sharp  to  admit  a  schoolteacher  ever  taught  you  any­ thing,  but  this  Mr  Barter,  who  was  crosseyed,  did.  Igot  in  his clutches when  I was eleven,  and the glorious  1950s had ju st begun. On account  of  schools  being blitzed  when  I was  an infant  (which I can  hardly  remember,  only  a  bit  of  the  buzz-bombs  at the  end), I had to walk a mile up into Kilburn  Park, to the place where this Mr Barter  gave  his  performance.  Now,  dig  this-because  this  was  it. Old  Mr  Barter  was the  only man  (or woman,  too)  in all the schools that  I  attended,  before  I packed  that  nonsense  in  three  years  ago, who  actually  made  me realize  two things,  of  which  number  one  is, that what you learned had some actual value to you personally,  and wasn't just  dropped on you like a punishment,  and number  two, that everything you learned, you hadn't learned  until you'd  really dug it: i.e.,  made  it part  of  your  own  experience.  He'd  tell  us  things-for example,  like  that  Valparaiso  was  a  big  city  in  Chile,  or that  x + y equals something  or other, or who all the  Henrys were, or Georges, and he'd  make  us feel this crazy stuff  really  concerned  us kids,  was something  to do with  us, and had  a value.  Also,  he made  me kinky about  books:  he  managed  to  teach  me-to  this  day,  I  don't  know how-that books  were not just  a thing like that-I mean, just  books
-but  somebody  else's mind  opened  up for me to look  into,  and he taught me the habit, later on, of  actually  buying  them! Yes-I mean real  books,  like  the  serious  paperbacks,  which  must  have  been  un-
 


 
60	COLI N   M ACIN N ES
known among the kids up in the Harrow road those days, who thought  a book's an SF or a Western, if they thought  it's   anything.
Since we're on the subject, and I can't cause any more red faces than I already have, I'd also like to mention that the second great influence of my life was something even  more  embarrassing, and this is that, believe it or not, I actually was, for two  whole  years a wolf cub! Yes-me! Well . . . this is the fable. I got swung into that thing when, like all kids do, I was called up for the Sabbath school, and I soon told that Sunday lot it could please take a walk, but somehow got latched on to this wolf cub kick, because it started to fascinate me, for the following reasons. The first week I attended, dragged there by Dad, the old cub master, who I now realize was a terrible old poof, said that he wanted my attendance to be volun­ tary, not forced, and if after a full month I found they made it so attractive I'd want to come of my own free will, then would that show? I said, sure, yes it would, thinking, naturally,  the  month would soon pass by, and they began to teach me a lot  of  crap I found, even at that age, absoh1tely useless and ridiculous, like light­ ing fires with two matches when matches are about the cheapest thing there are to buy, and putting tourniquets on kids' legs for snake-bites when there aren't any snakes in London, and anyway, what if they bit kids on the head or other sensitive paits? yet gradually, all the same, to everyone's astonishment, I did actually begin to be a raver for those weekly meetings in the Baptist corrugated-iron temple, because  I  really  felt-don't  laugh-that  for the first time, here was a family: at any rate, a lot, a mob, a click I could belong to. And though that dreadful old cub master with his awful.shorts, and his floppy khaki hat, was queer as a coot and even queerer, he didn't interfere with any of us kids in any way, and actually succeeded  in  teaching  us  moralsan you  believe  it? Well e did! He really did. I can honestly say the only ideas on    morals
I know anything of, were those that bent old cub master made me believe in, chiefly, I think, because he made us feel that he liked us, all us grubby-kneed little mo11sters, and cared what happened to us, and didn't u:ar1t anything from us, except that we look after our­ selves decently in the great big world hereafter. He  was  the first adult I'd ever met-even including Dael-who didn't come the adult at us-didn't use his strength, a11d won us over by persuasion.
 
A BSOLUTE  BEG IN N E RS	61
That  brings  me  to  today,  and  to the  third  item  in  my  education, my  university,  you  might  say,  and  that's the  jazz  clubs.  Now,  you can  think  what  you  like about  the art of  jazz-quite  frankly,  I  don't really care what you  think, because  jazz  is a thing so wonderful  that if anybody  doesn't  rave  about  it,  all  you  can  feel  for  them  is  pity: not  that  I'm  making  out  I  really  understand  it  all-I  mean,  certain LPs  leave  me  speechless. But  the  great  thing  about  the  jazz  world, and  all  the  kids  that  enter  into  it,· is  that  no  one,  not  a  soul,  cares what  your  class  is, or what  your  race  is, or what  your  income,  or  if you're boy, or girl, or bent, or versatile,  or what you  are-so long as you  dig  the  scene  and  can  behave  yourself,  and  have  left  all  that crap  behind  you,  too,  when  you  come  in  the  jazz  club  door.  The result  of  all this is that, in the jazz  world, you  meet  all kinds of  cats, on  absolutely  equal  terms,  who  can  clue  you  up  in  all  kinds  of directions-in   social   directions,   in   culture   directions,   in   sexual directions,   and  in  racial  directions . . .  in  fact,  almost  anywhere, really,  you  want  to  go  to  learn.  So  that's  why,  when  the  teenage thing  began  to  seem  to  me  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  exhibitionists
and moneylenders,  I cut out  gradually from the kiddo   water-holes,	1
and  made  it  for  the  bars,  and  clubs,  and  concerts  where  the  older   J
numbers of the jazz world gathered.
But this particular evening, I had to call at a teenage hut inside Soho, in order to contact two of my models, by names Dean Swift and the Misery Kid. Now, about Soho, there's this, that although so much crap's written about the area, of all London  quarters,  I think it's still one of the most authentic. I mean, Mayfair is just top spivs stepping into the slippers of the former gentry, and Belgravia, like I've said, is all flats in houses built as palaces,  and  Chelsea-well! Just take a look yourself, next time you're there. But in Soho, all the things they say happen, do: I mean, the vice of every kink, and speak­ easies and spielers and friends who carve each other up, and, on the other hand, dear old Italians and sweet old Viennese who've run their honest, unbent little businesses there since the days of George six, and five, and backward far beyond. And what's more, although the pavement's thick with tearaways, provided you don't meddle it's really a much safer area than  the respectable  suburban  fringe. It's not in Soho a sex maniac leaps out of a hedge on to your back and violates you. It's in the dormitory sections.
 


 
62	COLIN     MACIN NES
The coffee spot where I hoped I'd find my two duets was of the kind that's now the chic-est thing to date among the juniors­ namely, the pig-sty variety, and adolescent bum's delight. I don't exaggerate, as you'll see. What you do is, rent premises that are just as dear as any other, rip up the linos and tear out the nice fittings if there happen to be any, put in thick wood Boors  and  tables, and take special care not to wipe the cups properly, or sweep the butts and crusts and spittle off the Boor. Candles are a help or, at a pinch, non-pearl 40-watt blue bulbs. And a juke-box just for decoration, as it's considered rather na'ive to use one in these places.
This example was called Chez Nobody, and sure enough, sitting far apart from each other at distant tables, were the Dean and the Misery Kid. Though both are friends of mine, and, in a way, even friends of each other, these two don't mix in public, on account  of the Dean being a sharp modern jazz creation, and the Kid just  a skiffie survival, with horrible leanings to the trad. thing. That is to say, the Kid admires the groups that play what is supposed to be the authentic music of old New Orleans, i.e., combos of booking-office clerks and quantity-surveyors' assistants who've handed in their cards, and dedicated themselves to blowing what they believe to be the same note as the wonderful Creoles who invented the whole thing, when it all long ago began.
H you know the contemporary  scene, you  could tell them  apart at once, just like you could a soldier or sailor, with their separate uniforms. Take first the Misery Kid and his trad. drag. Long, brush­ less hair, white stiff-starched collar (rather grubby), striped shirt, tie of all one colour (red today, but it could have been royal-blue or navy), short jacket but an old one (somebody's riding tweed, most likely), very, very, tight, tight, trousers with wide str!pe, no sox, short boots. Now observe the Dean in the modernist number's version. College-boy smooth crop hair with burned-in parting, neat white Italian rounded-collared shirt, short Roman  jacket  very tailored (two little vents, three buttons), no-turn-up narrow trousers with 17-inch bottoms absolute maximum, pointed-toe shoes, and a white mac lying folded by his side, compared with Misery's sausage-
. rolled umbrella.
Compare them, and take your pick! I would add that their   chicks,
if present,  would match them  up with: trad. boy's girl-long  hair,
 
ABSOL U TE  BEG I N N ER S	63
untidy with long fringes, maybe jeans and a big floppy sweater, maybe bright-coloured never-floralled, never-pretty dress . . . smudged-looking's the objective. Modern jazz boy's girl-short hem­ lines, seamless stockings, pointed-toed high-heeled stiletto shoes, crepe nylon rattling petticoat, short blazer jacket, hair done up into the elfin style. Face pale-corpse colour with  a  dash  of  mauve, plenty of mascara.
I sat down just beside the Misery Kid, who was eating a gateau and had everything horrible about him, spotty, un-pressed, un­ laundered, but with the loveliest pair of eyes you ever saw, brown and funny and appealing, I can only say, not that the Kid ever asks you for anything, as he only speaks in sentences of  four words  at his most voluble.
'Evening, Kid,' I said. 'There's been a small disaster.'
He just gazed like a fish: brows up, but not really curious.
'You recollect the snaps I took of  you  as  the  poet Chatterton with your bird as your Inspiration in some nylon net?'
'So?' said the Kid.
'It's all right, my client's not bounced the order, but I've de­ veloped the stuff, and your chick came out too indistinct by far.'
'She not meant so?'
'She's meant to be vague, Misery Kid, but she's meant  to  be visible behind that nylon net. Well? I expect she must have moved.'
'You pay us for a second take?'
'Certainly, Mr Bolden. But I can't pay for anything till I give the prints to Mr x-Y-z.'
'Who he?' 'The client.'
The Misery Kid picked his nose and said,  'This  client  no deposit?'
'No. We've just got to do it all again, Mr Kid, to get our money.
Can you raise your partner?'
'I dunno I know,' he said. 'Bell me tonight, I tell you.'
He got up, not showing his feelings, which was really rather heroic, because here was this trad. child, alone among the teen­ agers, in the days of prosperity, still living like a bum and a bohemian, skint and possibly even hungry, but still not  arguing about  the  loot. If he'd  argued, he'd  have  got some out of  me,  but
 


 
64	COLIN   MA CIN N ES    \
to argue when  the dirt  dropped  down on your  head  was  contrary' to his whole trad. ideology. As the Misery Kid passed  by the  Dean on his way out, Dean Swift looked up and hissed at him, 'Fascist!' which the Kid ignored. These modem jazz boys certainly do feel strongly abou't the trad. reaction.
The Dean came over and sat down with me. I should explain haven't seen the Dean for several weeks, although he's my favourite and most succesful model. The Dean's speciality's an unusual one, which is posing always fully dressed, and yet, somehow,  managing to look pornographic. Don't ask me how! In the  studio,  exactly when he shouted out, 'Now!' I throw the switch, though he looks quite ordinary to me, and then, behold! when he's developed,  there he is-indecent. Snaps of the Dean sell like hot ice-cream among vintage women with too many bosoms and time on their hands, and even my Ma, when she saw some photos of him was impressed-he looks so dam  available,  the  Dean  does. She actually asked to meet
him' but Dean Swift is not interested in this, the chief reason being that he's a junkie.
If you have a friend who's a junkie, like I have the Dean, you soon discover thern's no point whatever discussing his addiction. It's as senseless as discussing love, or religion,  or  things  you  only  feel  if you feel them, because the Dean, and I suppose all his fellow jurikies, is convinced that this is 'a mystic way of life' (the Dean's own words), and you and I, who don't jab hot needles in our arms, are just  going  through  life  missing  absolutely  everything  worth while in it. The Dean always says, life's just  kicks.  Well,  I agree with him, so it is, but personally, it seems to me the big kick you should try to get by how you live it sober.  But  tell  that  to  the Dean!
Why I'd not recently seen him, is that he'd until then been away inside. This has fairly often happened to the Dean, owing to his breaking into chemists' shops, and  as  he  suffers  a  lot  when he's cut off from the world and  all  it  gives  in  there,  he  doesn't like you to refer to it when  he  emerges.  At  the  same  time,  he does like you to say you're glad to see him once again, so it's all a trifle dicey.
'Hail,  squire,'  _I  said.  'Long  time  no  see.  How  is  you  are  we? Won't you say tell?'
 
ABSOL U TE  BEG I N N ERS	65
The Dean smiled in his world-weary way. 'Doesn't this place stink?' he said to nie.
'Well certainly, Dean Swift, it does, but  do you  mean  its air, or just its atmosphere?'
'The both. The only civilized thing about it,' the Dean continued, 'is that they let you sit here, w)1en you're skint.'
The Dean gazed round at the teenage products like a concentra­ tion camp exterminator. I should explain the Dean, though only just himself an ex-teenager, has sad valleys down his cheeks, and wears a pair of steel-rimmed glasses (which he takes off for our posing sessions), so that his Dean-look is habitually sour and solemn. (The Swift part of the thing comes from his rapid disappearance at the pproach of iiny cowboys. You're talking to him and then, tick-tock! he's vanished.) I could see that now the Dean,  as  usual  when skinned and vicious, was going to engage in his favourite theme, i.e.. the horror of teenagers. 'Look at the beardless microbes!' he ex­ claimed, loud enough for everyone to hear. 'Look at the pram products at their plotting and their planning!'
And, as a matter  of  fact, you could see what  he meant, because  to see  the  kids  hunched  over  the  tables  it  did  look  as  if  some  con­ spiracy  was  afoot  to  slay  the  elder  brethren   and  majorities.  And when  I'd  paid,  and  we  went  out  in  the  roads,  even  here  in  this Soho,  the  headquarters  of  the  adult  mafia,  you  could .everywhere see  the  signs  of  the  un-silent   teenage  revolution.  The  disc  shops with  those  lovely  sleeves  set  in  their  windows,  the  most  original thing  to  come  out  in  our  lifetime,  and  the  kids  inside  them  pur­ chasing   guitars,   or   spending   fortunes   on  the   songs   of   the   Top Twenty.  The shirt-stores  and  bra-stores  with  cine-star  photos  in  the window,  selling all the exclusive  teenage  drag I've  been  describing. The  hair-style  saloons  where  they  inflict  the  blow-wave  torture  on the  kids  for  hours  on  end.  The  cosmetic  shops-to  make  girls  of seventeen,  fifteen,  even  thirteen,  look  like  pale  rinsed-out  sophisti­ cates.  Scooters  and  bubble-cars  c.lrive11  madly  <low11  the  roads  by kids  who,  a few years  ago,  were  pushing  toy  ones on the pavemeut. And  everywhere you  go the narrow  coffee bars an<l darkened  ct:llars with  the kids packed  tight, just  whispering,  like bees  inside the hive waiting for a glorious queen _bee to appear.
·See what I mean,' the Dean said.
 


 
 


 
66	COL I N  M A CI N N ES
And   the  chicks,   round   the   alleys,  on  that   summer   afternoon! Heavens,  each  year  the  teenage  dream-girl  has  grown  younger,  and now,  there  they  were,   like  children   that've   dres_sed  up   in  their fashionable  aunties' sharpest  clothes-and suddenly you  realize that it's not a game, and that these chicks mean business, and that  it's not so  much  you,  one  of  the  boys,  they  aim  their  persons  at,  as  their sheer,  sweet,   energetic  legs  walk   down   the  pavement   three   by three,  but no, at quite adult numbers,  quite mature things, at whose eyes they shoot confident, proud looks there's no mistaking.
'Little madams,' said the Dean. 'There you go!' I answered.
Here Dean Swift stopped us in his tracks.
'I tell you,' he said, pulling his us-striped and rear-buckled cap down over his eyes, 'I tell you something. These teenagers are ceasing to be rational, thinking, human beings, and turning into mindless butterfiies. And they're turning into butterflies all of the same size and colour, that have to flutter round exactly the same flowers, on exactly the same gardens. Yes!' he exclaimed at a group of kiddos coming clicking, cracking prattling by. 'You're nothing but a bunch of butterflies!'
But the kidettes took no notice of  the  Dean  whatever, because just at that moment . . . there! in his hand-styled car with his initials in its number, there sped by the newest  of  the  teenage  singing raves, with beside him his brother, and his composer, and his chicklet, and his Personal Manager, so that all that was missing was his Mum. And the kids waved, and the young Pied Piper waved his free hand back, and everyone for a few seconds was latched  on to the glory.
'Singer!' cried the Dean out after him. 'Har,  Har!'
He was standing out there in the road, gesticulating at the  de­ parting vehicle. Abruptly, though, he sheered  off  at  an  angle,  and I had to catch him up across the way. He looked back over his neck, gripped  my arm, and hurried  on. 'Cowboys,' he   explained.
I looked back too. 'They didn't seem to me like cowboys,' I  told the Dean.
But to tell him this, was like telling some expert  in  Hatton Garden that you don't think that stone there is a diamond.
'I tell you this,' the Dean said fiercely. 'I can smell a copper in   the
 
A BSOL UTE  BEG IN NE R S	67
dark, a hundred feet away, blindfolded. And anyway,' he continued pityingly, 'didn't you see those two wen• dressed in casual clothes, but with their shoes mended?'
That clinched the matter for the  Dean.
'You don't like coppers, do you,' I said to him.
The Dean paused on his tracks. 'The only good thing about the bastards,' he said gently, 'is that they've  all  got  themselves  together into the same cowboy force. Just imagine what the world  would be if monsters like them were out among the rest of  us, without a  label!'
The poor old Dean! He really hates the law although, unlike most that do, he doesn't fear it, really doesn't, though he's been given the matchbox treatment on more than one night occasion. Of course, all the jobs he's ever done have brought him into conflict with the cow­ boys-e.g., faith-healer, dance-hall instructor, club escort, property consultant and old-lady sitter.
We'd  now reached  a street down  near  'the Front',  as the  girls on
the game call the thoroughfare, and here the  Dean  whispered, 'I must have a fix very shortly, and I need a new whosit for  my whatsit.' So we went into a chemist's shop nearby.
Behind the counter was a female case who didn't like the appear­
an-- · of the Dean, and went into  that  routine  that  shopkeepers have 1- -fected in the kingdom, that is, to get on the busy thing and bustle about with very necessary tasks, and when you cough or something, look up as if you'cl broken into their private bedroom. And when they speak, they use a new kind of 'politeness' that's very common in our city, i.e., to say kind and courteous words, with a bitchy edge of nastiness, so they disarm you as  they  beat  you down. To open the thing, of course, she asked us, 'Can I help you?'
Ah! but in the Dean she'd met her equal, because he  has  per­ fected, and almost patented, a style of being terribly polite in a way that doesn't mean a thing, and is in  fact a mockery  of  the person he's polite to, though not easy for them to pin down, because the Dean acts so serious and earnest they couldn't quite make up their minds  if it was sarcasm.
'Yes, Mad-ahm!' he answered, 'you certainly can help me, if you please,  and if I'm not taking up too much  of  your  time.'
An<l  then  they  began  their  duel  of  politeness,  their  eyes blazing
hatred  at each other, an<l there  you  are,  I tho11ght,  that's what   hap-
 


 

68	CO LI N   M ACI N N F.S
pens  when  people  grow  to think  that  politeness,  which  is so lovely, is a form  of weakness.  And when  the Dean  had  succeeded  in  luring the  old  slut  to get  out  all  sorts  of  products  he  didn't  really  need  at all, he suddenly  said, 'Thank  yo11,  Mad-ahm,  so much,'  and  dipped his  cap  at  her  and  went  out  in  thi· sun  saying,  'One  of  the  fellow­ sufferers at the Dubious will lend me what Ineed.'
The   Dubious,   I should   explain,   is   of   all   the   drinking-clubs that  fester  in  Soho,  the  one  that's  in  fashion  just  at  present  with the  sharper  characters,  and  there,  sure  enough,  when  Icame  in with  the  Dean,  I  saw,  among  others,  Mr  Call-me-Cobber,  and  his friend the ex-Deb-of-Last-Year:  he being a telly personality  from the outer colonies,  and  she one who  slipped  effortlessly  off  the  pages  of the  weekly  social  glossies  on to those  of  the  monthly  fashion  ones. As a matter  of fact, the ex-Deb's rather  nice in a hunt ball  way,  but the  same  cannot  be  said  of  Call-me-Cobber,  who  really  flogs  that dinkum  Aussie  thing  too  hard,  though  on  the  telly  screen  it  looks terrific, so sincere.
While  the  Dean  went  rambling  off  into  dark  corners,  Isnapped this drunken loving couple, propping my RolleiHex upon the bar.
'Oh, hullo, reptile,' said the ex-Deb,' 'perhaps you can help my paramour with his new series.'
'It's called,' the Cobber said, 'Lorn Lovers, and we're looking for persons deeply in love who fate has sundered.'
'You're  too  young  for  tears,  Isuppose,'  the  ex-Deb  said  to  me, 'but maybe among your somewhat older companions . . . ?'
I nominated the Hoplite as Lorn Lover of the year.
'And who's he in love with?' Call-me-Cobber asked. 'We want to confront the frantic pair in front of the cameras, without either knowing beforehand what's going to hit them.'
'He's in love with an American,' I said .
'A good angle, though we'll have to pay the fee in dollars . . . Yes . confront the pair of them, and get them in a clinch.'
'lt11be sensational,' I said.
'His trouble,' said the ex-Deb, pointing a princess-size cigarette­ holder at her lover, 'is his success. Ever since that fabulous series 011 the Angries, when the thing first broke, they expect the highest from him.'
'And  they'll  get it!' Call-me-Cobber  cried. 'It's my aim, my  mis-
 
A BSOLUTE   BEGI N N E RS	69
sion, and my achievement to bring quality culture material  to the pop culture masses.'
'He's the culture courtier  of  all time,' his lady  said, as they   both
gulped the firewater down, then tried to kiss each other.
Call-rne-Cobber  looked  around the basement  room, where parties crouched  on  plastic  covered  seats	ith  dim  rose  lights  shining  re­ flected  up  at them  from  the  parquet  floor.  'Today,'  he  announced, 'each  woman,  man  and  child  in the  United  Kingdom  can  be  made into a personality,  a star. Whoever you are-and Irepeat, whoever­ we can put  you  in front of  cameras and make you live for millions. But  no  one  seemed  interested  in  this  idea  down  there  in  the Dubious, so Call-me-Cobber  slipped off his stool and went searching for the toilet. And the ex-Deb turned all her attention to myself, and started  suddenly to get 'maternal'.  Because  a woman,  if she's high and  a  bit  frustrated,  and  you're  young,  is  very  apt,  I've  found,  to want  to show she 'understands'-though  what, you  never  quite dis­
cover, and it's most embarrassing.
'Tell me about your  camera,' the ex-Deb said, leaning across aud fondling  the thing  and breathing  spirits  on  me  though,  Imust  say, looking smashing.
'What you want to know about it?'Ienquired.
'How did you learn to use it?' she said mysteriously: 'By trial and error.'
'Ahl'
I didn't get that 'Ah!'.
'When you were young?' she said. 'A boy?' 'That's it.'
She  gazed  at  me  as  if  I  was  straight  out  of   Dr    Barnardo's.
'You've had a hard life, I can see,' she said 'sympathetically'.
·No, I wouldn't say so'-and I wouldn't, really. 'Ah, but I can see you have!' she. nattered on.
I gave up. 'Well-you win,' I told her.
'Your mother must have been a bitch,' she said.
Now, though I quite agreed with this, it made  me furious! Who the hell did she think she was, this fashion model-Mrs  Freud?
'I'll tell you something,' I said, 'about my mother. She may have her defects-who hasn't?-but she's got a lot of  courage,  and  she's kept her looks, which are terrific.'
 
70	COLIN  M A CI N N ES
'You're loyal, kid,' said the  ex-Deb,  her  swish-skirt  nearly  sliding her off the stool in her  emotion.
'You bet,' I said, heaving her on to it again.
She held my arm, and said, 'Tell me a secret about you teenagers. Do you have a very active sex existence?'
They can't keep off it. 'No,' I replied, 'we don't.'
And, as a matter of fact, what I said was  true, because  although you often seen teenagers boxed up together in a free-and-easy, intimate sort of way, it doesn't very often reach the point  of no return. But in this kingdom we reside in, the firm belief of the venerables seems to be that, if you see kids out and about enjoying themselves, then fleshy vices must be at the bottom of it all, some­ where, not just as it often is-frisking and frolicking, and having a carefree ball.
So as this wasn't the ex-Deb's business, anyway, I changed the subject round and said to her, 'Where will you  take  your  holiday this year, Miss Sheba?'
'Who, me? Oh, I dunno . . . I always get taken some place or other where there's sand, and quarrels, and a quick flight home . . . And you, child? I hear all you brats are hitch-hiking across the Continent these days.'
'No longer,' I said, firmly.
'Why no longer?' she asked me, coming into focus.
'The hitch thing's out. We're tired of being molested, and  arriving at destinations we didn't mean to. We pay our own fares now, like everybody else, in fact a lot of the new travel panders depend on teenage travellers.'
'So you've been in all those Continental places?'
Now, it's a funny thing . . . why should I be ashamed  that I've never lef t our island yet? Why should I? because the reason is, although I've had opportunities enough (well, only last summer, the Marxists tried to ship me to a Youth thing  in  Bulgaria-think of that!), I've just not wanted to . . . Or rather . . . Well, as a matter of fact, I haven't even ever yet left London, except for once, of which I have the vaguest recollection, when I was  trundled  down  to Brighton for the day, beside the sea, in connection with one of my Ma's manoeuvres, and all I remember of it is being parked here and there, upon the beach  and up on bar  stools with  ginger beer,   while
 
ABSOLUTE  BEG IN NERS	71
she disappeared to mess about with the easy-money-boy who was her escort. As for the country, that great green thing that hangs around outside the capital, with animals, I've never seen it, because even when the bombs fell thickest in war-time, my old Ma refused to leave her manor,, and refused to have Vern and me evacuated, come what may. And all I remember of that journey up and down to Brighton, is getting into trains and getting out-the rest was lying rocking on the hot and smelly seat, or vomiting.
Yet  I must  get away some  day, and  see the world.  Not  just  that
Continent they speak of-Paris and  Rome,  and  all  that  crap-but the great wide one, like Brazil, say, or Japan, and that is why I must be sensible and save some loot, boy, hustle up some big stuff and depart in peace aboard some jet. So,
'No,' I replied, 'not all of  them. I'm happiest  in my manor,   taking
sunbathes in the Hyde, or doing swallows from the top board  at   the
Hampstead ponds.'
She peered at me, her eyes swimming with the lush that she'd consumed. 'You're a poet, infant, in your way,' she said.
'Oh, I dunno about that,' I answered  her.
While this ridiculous conversation of the ex-Deb and myself was still proceeding, some musicians  there  in  the  Dubious  had begun to have a blow, because apparently a character called Two-Thumbs Tumbril, who plays bass, was holding some auditions for an out-of­ city gig he thought might happen, if he could recruit a combo. There in the Dubious which, as I think I've said, is in a cellar, the instru- ments resounded with a thunderous effect, and as I listened to the sweet and soothing sound I once again reflected, thank the Lord  I was born into the jazz age, what  on earth could  it have been  when all they had to listen to was ballad tunes and waltzes? Because jazz music is a thing that, as few things do, makes you  feel  really  at home in the world here, as if it's an okay notion to be born  a   human
animal, or so.
A cat at the counter said, 'Nice, but they'll not make Bewley- Ooley.' Another answered, 'Well, who  cares?  That  garden-party's for the ooblies and the Hooray Henries, anyway.' A third just said, 'Great,' with a soft dream in his eyes-but that may have been be­ cause he'd just been dragging on a splif inside the toilet.
From that same toilet, not quite yet fully adjusted before    leaving,
 


 
72	COLIN   MACIN NES
now  reappeared  the  dinkum  Call-me-Cobber   number,   who  eyed the performers  as  if he was  Mr  Granz  in  person,  like  all  these  telly
 


·Oh, arc you. gusted.
 
A BSOL U TE  BEGI N N El'S	73
Clever  boy.  I'll  visit  you   at  Brixton,'  I  said,   dis-
 
personalities   do,   acting   the   universal   impresario   to  mankind.
And after the bliss of hearing the boys blow  in  the  proper  com­ pany, the sight  of  the  dinkum  wrought  me  down  a  bit,  because in the jazz thing, the audience is half the  battle,  even  more  than half.
'Nice,' he decided, 'but it falls between two stools. They're neither pop nor prestige-worthy.'
'That's two good stools,' I said, 'to fall between,' and slid off my own to leave them.
The ex-Deb-of-Last-Year grabbed me by the port pocket of my strides. 'Are you  going to Miss  Lament's?'  she asked me.
'Yes, maybe I catch you there,' I told her, as I unhooked her vermilion claws.
'You leaving us?'
'Just for a moment, Knightsbridge girl,' I said.
Because I'd seen the Wiz come in the place, and wanted a swift word with my blood brother.
The Wiz was wearing a gladiator  Lonsdale  belt  with  studs  on it, and this he unbuckled as he came into the Dubious, like a soldier that's been relieved from guard. But still he looked wary, as  he always did, and no doubt in his sleep as well, as if the world was in the other corner of the ring where he did battle, and himself a lone­ some hunter on the London jungle trail. 'Come over behind the music,' I said to him, and we got on the other side  of  the  per­ formers, so that their sound made a barrier that hedged us from the lush-swilling  visitors  around  the counter.
'What's new?' I asked the Wiz.
A nice thing about Wizard is that he forgets a quarrel  absolutely. A battle, with the Wiz, is always for a purpose, like a meal, and once it's over, he just doesn't seem to think of it any more at all. He eyed me with approval, and I could see that once again I was his old reliable, perhaps the only one he had outside eternity.
'I've news for you,' he said.
I must admit at feeling anxious, because the Wiz's bits of news are apt to sweep you out to sea until you can get adjusted to them.
Tm thinking,' he said, 'of going into business with a chick.'
 
'You don't approve?'
' How can I? You're not that kind of hustler.' ' Try anything once . . .'
'Oh,  sure.  Oh  sure,  oh  sure.  Next  thing  is  breaking  and enter-
ing.'	.	.
I got  up to fetch  some drinks,  and  also to have time to thmk   of
this.  Because  I'd  always  imagined  one day Wiz  might  go that  way, hut always decided he had brains enough  to do better  than that, and not  get  himself  into  some  bower-bird's  clutches.  Because  say  ':hat you  like,  in  that  set-up  it's the female  party  who  contols the situa­ tion,   even   if   she   gives   the   male   one   all  her   earmngs,   and   he crunches   her  011   Sunday   evenings   after   the   weekly   visit   to  the Odeon .  The  simple  reason  being  that  her  own  activity,  whatever you  may  think  of  it is legal, and the boy's  is not,  and  all she has  to do if there's  an  argument  is. dial  Detective-sergeant  Someone round
the corner.
'Health, wealth and happiness,' he said sarcastically.
·Happiness! You should talk!' There was a silence. Then,
·Go on,' said Wiz. 'Let's have it.' 'What use, if you've decided?'
·Let's have it all the same.' I groaned, I really did.
'It's just,  Wiz,  that  it's not  your  kind  of  thing. Tell  me  one ponce
you know who's got real brains.'
-   ·I know of several.'
·I   don't  mean   craft  or  cunning,   I  mean   brains. Constructive
brains.'
The  Wiz  said,  'I  could  introduce  you  to  several  bookies, club
owners, car-hire proprietors, who've built up their business by loot they made when on the game before retirement.'	.	.
I  said,  ·I  coulcl  introduce  you  to  several  Saturday-m1dmght-at­
the-chemist's, and several in-and-out boys, and several corpses, who've had just the same idea.'
'Ah. Well, we disagree.'
I  said  to the lunatic,  ·It  may  be  all  right  for  creatures who are
 


 
74	COLIN   M ACIN N ES
young in mind, as well as age, but, let's face it, Wiz, you're too mature already. You know too much what you'd be doing.'
The Wizard smiled, if you can call it that. 'And this,'  he said gently, 'comes from a kiddo known around the town for flogging pornographic photos.'
Oh well, hell!
'In the first place,' I said . . .
'And don't forget the second-and the third . . .'
'In the first place,' I contin ued, 'you know very well only some of my snaps are pornographic, and I'm on that kick for giggle.s as much as loot. In the second, as you say, you know I'm pulling out of that activity as soon as ever-as I've often told you. And in the third, yes, as you also say, are you really comparing poncing with what I do?' 'Not really,' the Wizard said, 'because it's more straightforward,
and it's better paid.'
'Oh, if you say so, Sporting Life.'
There was another pause for refreshments between rounds. 'And who's the lucky chick?' I asked him.
'Oh, girl I know. Of course,' he said, 'you'll  understand  it's not wise to say who, specially to anyone who disapproves.'
'How .right you are, young Wizard . Anyway, whoever it is, I pity her. You II have a dozen on the game before you're nicked.'
'I'd not be surprised,' the Wizard said. I drained my non-alcoholic beverage.
'Well, let me tell you, genius,' I said, 'two things,  and  do just listen. The first is, cute little number though you may  be, you're really not the fixer type, the hustler type, because you're too dam delighted by the sport of it to take it seriously enough. The other, which you know full well, and should be ashamed of yourself for, is that you really have got brains, and if you'd had even a fragment of education, you'd have done big things, boy, and it's not too late. It's really not too late: why don't you study?'
'The school of life,' Wiz answered. 'Brixton class.'
'So what? Each occupation has its risks.' 'Fool.'
'Yeah? Oh, well . . .'
The  Wizard  looked  up  at  the  ceiling,  because  the  combo had
 
A BSOLUTE    BEGIN NERS

stopped its operations for a moment. And me, I real_ly felt I must sa something   to   stop  this   thing:   not   because   I   d1appro:e  of   it (although  I did), but  because  I knew  that, if the Wizard  did it, then
I'd lose him .
But he got  in first, now. 'I'll tell you  something,' the Wizard  said
to me. 'I've thought it over carefully-and I'm safe as houses. Look!' And I looked at him . ' Imagine me in the dock! What mug-even a magistrat e, let alone a jury- is going to believe a baby-face like me
could be a ponce?'
I  waited, then  said, 'If you  could  see yourself  in  a mirror   now,
this very moment , you'd  realize you  don't look young at all. Not  at
all, Wiz, you don't-you look dam  old.'
'Oh  I do?' said Wiz. 'Well, then, let me tell you something else.
This i an old, old thing, this whore, and ponce, and client business. Since A. and  Eve, there's always been  the woman , and the   visitor,
and the local male.'
'Be the visitor, then.'
' Nobody  likes the  easy-money  boy,  there  I agree. Bu.t the rasos
he's disliked for, kiddo, are all very hypocritical. The chent shifts his shame on to the ponce, see, and the ponce is willing to carry it. for him-give him a clear, social, respectable alibi. Then, no man hkes paying for what the ponce is paid for. And most of  all, boy, .the world is jealous  of the ponce! Well, kid, and rightly!' And he smiled
a great big aren't-I-clever smile.
' Fine, fine,' I cried. 'We'll have to get you testifying before    those
Wolfenden creations.'
'Oh, them,'  said the Wizard . 'The last person  they'd ever want  to
ask about the game is anyone who knows about it . . . a whor.e, a ponce, even a client. You know what the  Wolfenden  is  for?  he went on, leaning across and grinning at me. 'It's so as to play down the queer thing in our country, and hide it behind the kosher game. It's so as to confuse the two, and get all the mugs muddled, so that if thev call down fire and brimstone, they don't know on what.'
'Nt so loud, Wiz,' I cried, because the combo had broken up, and
someone hadn't yet put on the pick-up  once   again.	.	.
So there it was. Already, I was speaking secretl y to the W1z, hke I had  never  done before, becoming  a part  of  his squalid  little  plot,
and, believe me, I was revolted.
 
 


 
76	COLIN    MACIN N ES
'Christi' I exclaimed. 'What's happening to me? My girl, I've lost her to the Spades and queers, and now my friend, I'm losing him to the girls.'
'Don't compare me with Spades,' said Wiz.
'Now, be intelligent, I wasn't. I was comparing Suze with you.' 'Nice! Perhaps  it's you  who's worrying  most  about  all  this, little
latchkey-kid.'
'Oh, perhaps!'
'Well,' said the Wizard, making as if to rise, 'when the cowboys start to fill me in, l'll have you buzzed immediately for bail.'
'Don't talk to me like that, Wiz, please!'
'Oh, I know you'll come running . . . you adore me!'
This was evidently it, and I reached up and slapped the Wiz real hard. Real hard, I did. He didn't look all  that  surprised,  and he didn't retaliate at all. He just  rubbed his cheek and walked  off   over
to the bar, so that I realized this was how he wanted it  to be. Oh, fuck, I thought.
So I went out of the Dubious to catch the summer evening breeze. The night was glorious, out there. The air was sweet as a cool bath the stars were peeping nosily beyond the neons, and the citizens of the Queendom, in their jeans and separates, were floating down the Shaftesbury avenue canals, like gondolas. Everyone had loot to spend, everyone a bath with verbena salts behind them, and nobody had broken hearts, because they all were all ripe for the easy summer evening. The rubberplants in the espressos had been dusted, and the smooth white lights of the new-style Chinese retaurants-not the old Mah Jongg categories, but the latest thing with broad glass fronts, and dacron curtainings, and a beige carpet over the interiors-were shining a dazzle, like some monster telly screens. Even those horrible old anglo-saxon public-houses- all potato crisps and flat, stale ale, and puddles on the counter bar, and spittle-looked quite alluring, provided you didn't push those two­ ton doors that pinch your arse, and wander in. In fact, the capital was a night-horse dream. And I thought, 'My lord, one thing is certain, and that's that they'll make musicals one day about the glamour­
studded 1950s.' And I thought, my heaven, one thing is certain too, rm miserable.
And then, who should I see, wandering along the Soho   thorough-
 
A BSOLUTE  BEGIN N ERS	77
fare, but the Kid-from-Outer-Space, who doesn't know that is his name, because I haven't told him so. This kid, who is extremely nice and that and who I know from school days and even from the Baden-Pwell contraption, belongs entirely to the Other World, i.e., as I've explained, the outer world that doesn't dig the  scene, although, in many ways, they keep the whole scene going. This Outer-Space kid works for the municipal, doing whatever he _does, and somehow I meet him every year or so, just once, by accident, like this, when sometimes he strays out of his  four-square  manor into mine, or I do, vice versa. And then we meet like travellers,   and I tell him of the wonders of my section of the capital,  real and fabled, and he tells me of his sports activities, and of his saving for a motor-scooter, and of which side of the books a debit item goes in at the municipal,  or a credit does. He's sweet, but  rather  dull,  though
not a drag, exactly.	.       .
'What knot would  you  use,'  I said, coming  up beside  him,   and
speaking from the corner of the mouth into his ear, 'to tie two ropes of unequal thickness, supposing you had two such ropes,  and wanted to join the pair of them together?'	.
'Oh-ho,  it's  you,  boy  Mowgli,'  said  this    Outer-pace	reation,
stopping  and slapping my  shoulder  till  I sank four  mches  mto the
Soho pavement.	.	.
'Me, me! How are the national problems shapmg up? ?ive me   the
loaded gossip from the accountancy cats in the to hall.	. , 'The budget's balanced,' said the 0.-S. kid, but the :noney it s
balanced up with is worth only a third of itself, these days.
'Dig! And how's the scooter whatsit? How many legs you  broken
besides your own?'	,	.
The  0.-S.  kid  looked  sad.  'I  not  got  the  scooter,   he   rephed,
'because my Ma preferred a telly.'
'Boy-you a traitor? You let old Ma tell you how to spend your personal earnings?'
'Well, son, she's getting on, she is.'
·Likes to sit there in her wicker  rocker, with her eyes crossed   on
the commercials?'
'Don't be sarky, now. You sore about something or other?' 'Very so, I am. Oh, yes!'	,
'Don't spread it round about, then. Not on me.
 


 
78	COLIN  MACIN NES
'Okay, colonel. I shall keep it private.'
'Say what you like, see, there's lots to be learned from    television.
I know it's for profits, but in its way it's a big universal education.' 'The population' s seeing through the door at last, you think?' 'Well, isn't it? Tell me.'
'It's seeing only digests, slants and angles.'
'They kidding us then, those people? All those professors and authorities?'
'Why, sure they are! You think they tell us any  secrets  that's worth knowing? You think a professor who's studied twenty years can pop up in a studio and tell you something real?'
'It looks real, there up on the screen . . .'
·o, oh well . . . I tell you, Wolverine,' I explained to this simple, trustmg soul, as we started walking down the boulevard, dodging prowlers, dodging gropers, dodging layabouts and tarts, 'I tell you. All these things-like telly witch-doctors, and advertising pimps, and show business pop song pirates-they despise us-dig?-they sell us cut-price sequins when we think we're getting diamonds.'
The boy  stopped.  'Listen,' he said,  'you  got  to believe something
in this world.'
'All right-you  say so. Well, look right there!' I said, and pointed at a coffee bar that's even listed  now in serious guidebooks,  because the legend is, the top pop teenage rages were all 'discovered' there. 'See this establishment?' I said. 'See all the kids jam-packed  in the.re beside  the  jukes,  looking  like  they  feel  in  at  the  prize-giving,  the authentic big event?'
'I know the place. I been there.'
'I bet you have! It's made for mugs like you. Well, let me tell   you
-	no teenage nightingale ever was "discovered" in that  place until the telly cameras and the journalists moved in there  for  the massacre. The singing kids had all found out themselves, across the river, south, or anywhere, before those vultures gathered round to
peck the kitty. I tell you, Tarzan, that fish-bowl over there is just as real as nothing.'
I could see what was happening: on  account  of  my argument with the Wizard, and my earlier cul-de-sac with Suze, I was coming the acid drop with this young feller. So I did what  I've found  best on  these occasions, namely,  cut the  umbilical,  and  I dashed  into a
 
ABSOLU TE  BEG IN NERS	79
club entrance with a wave and crying, 'Moment!', and picked up the telephone and dialled the operator, and said, hullo to her and asked her how I made a call to the prime minister, as I was a tourist from New Zealand and had the same name as Mr M., and wanted to ask the poor old geezer if we were possibly related. And after she'd sorted me out-quite nicely, I must say-I hung up and dashed out again, and found the Outer-Space kid still standing there, with his mouth open, and asked him about his sporting activities, because he was a boxer, though the singlet kind .
He said there were good fights billed south  of  the  river soon, with some boys from his club, so why not  go together  I said,  oh, yes. Then he said meanwhile, what about we take in a film this evening? But that was no good to me, because you don't go  into Soho to see films, because Soho is a film, and anyway, most times I go to cinemas I walk out half way through because  all I see is  a sheet hanging up there, and a lot of idiots staring at it, and- hidden up behind all this there's just a boy operating the machinery with a fag hanging in his mouth even when he puts the record on for the 'God Save', and the cattle down there rise up on their corns, but not he, no! Life is the best film for sure, if you can see it as a film. So when I explained this, he said what about a bite?-a steak was what he actually suggested. And I said sorry, I was a vegetarian, which I am, not because of the poor animals or anything, but just  because you belch much less, and red meat gives me the horrors.
So clearly, it wasn't going to be a big night out with the 0.-S. kid, and now, as always happened, after being so pleased to see each other once again, we were just as glad to say farewell . . . isn't that like so many human relations? 'Remember me to your old  Ma,' I said, 'and don't let her get ideas about a second telly.'
And all of a sudden I thought, I must get out of this fairground area, and have a bit of calm and meditation, so I hailed a cab and told the driver would he take me down by the embankment, end to end, first one way, and then the other. He didn't enjoy this much, because taxi-drivers, like everyone that has ponce activities, like to pretend they're necessary and useful as well as for hire, but he naturally agreed, because the adults love to take your money and make you feel they're doing you a favour, both combined.
Whoever thought up the Thames embankment was a genius.  It
 

 


 
80	COLIN  M ACIN NES
lies curled firm and gentle round the river like a boy does with a girl, after it's over, and it stretches in a great curve from the parliament thing, down there in Westminster, all the way north and east into the City. Going in that way, downstream, eastwards, it's not so splendid, but when you come back up along it-oh! If the tide's in, the river's like the ocean, and you look across the great wide bend and see the fairy advertising palaces on the south side beaming in the water, and that great white bridge that floats across it grace­ fully, like a string of leaves. If you're fortunate, the cab gets all the greens, and keeps up the same steady speed, and looking out from the upholstery it's like your own private Cinerama, except that in this one the show's never, never twice the same. And weather makes no difference, or season, it's always wonderful-the magic always works. And just above the diesel whining of the taxi, you hear those river noises that no one can describe, but you can always recognize. Each time I come here for the ride, in any mood, I get a lift, a rise, a hoist up into joy . And as I gazed out on the water like a mouth, a bed, a sister, I thought how, my God, I love this city, horrible though it may be, and never ever want to leave it, come what it may send me. Because though it seems so untidy, and so casual, and so keep­ your-distance-from-me, if you can get to know this city well enough to twist it round your finger, and if you're its son, it's always on your side, supporting you-or that's what I imagined.
So when we returned again to Westminster,  with  the  driver's neck all disapproval, I asked this coachman to turn south, across the stream, down to the Castle: because the thought had come to me it would be nice, after so many mixed emotions, to look in on Mannie Katz and his spouse Miriam.
Mannie  I first met  at a jellied  eel stall near the Cambridge  circus, when  we  both  reached  for  the  vinegar  and  said  pardon.  As  you'll have guessed, the boy  is Jewish, likewise  Miriam  (and their one off­ spring), but I d<m't think it's only because  I am a bit myself,  as I've explained,  on  my  Mum's  side, that  I admire  this  couple  so. Here  I must explain my attitude to the whole Jewish thing which  in a word is,  thank  God  (theirs  and  ours)  they're  here.  I  know  all  the  argu­ ments  about  them,  back  to  front,  and  quite  see  what  the  Gentiles mean who are disturbed by them-but really! Add up all the defects that  you  can  think  of,  please,  and  put  them  beside  the  great  fact
 
A BSOLUTE  BEGINNER S	81
that  the Jewish families  love life , are on its side, are rinsed  right  out with  it . . . and what  do those debit things  amount to? Just  go inside a Jewish  household,  anywhere, I tell you,  and however  dreadful  you may  find  them,  what  sticks  out  six  miles  and  strikes  you  in  your consciousness  is  that  they're  living.  It's  all  a  great  noisy, boasting , arguing, complaining  mess all right, but they're  alive!  And how they handle whatever  stuff  life's made of, like it was a material they were sampling,  makes  you  realize  immediately  that  they're  an  old,  old, senior  people  who've  been  in  the  business  of  existence  for  a  very long  while  indeed.  I  love  London  all  right,  as  I've  explained.  But_ when  the  Jewish  population  have  all  made  enough  loot  to  take  oH for America,  or Israel, then  I'm leaving too. It would  be turning  out
the light.
Mannie,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  has  been  to  Israel,  on  a  writers'
congress there, and just missed  that  two-day  battle  with the Pharaohs we're all trying to forget. But being  a Cockney  kid,  he's not as aggressive as the genuine Israelis who, when you meet them round the coffee bars, describe the orange-grove they live in as if it was a continent, and know the answers to absolutely everything be­ fore you've even asked the questions. Mannie's an authentic Cock­ ney, by the way, not one of the suburban variety-bandbox imitations , and he's hard, and sad, and  humorous,  and  sentimental,  just like they are. Miriam's his second lady, and he must  have  married the first one from the cradle (she was one of ours-they came unstuck), because he's only just now hitting twenty, like we  all are.  There's also a young warrior of  two years  old called  Saul who,  in  spite of all I've said in favour of Jewish family existence, is  a  bloody nuisance, and needs some of that Israeli discipline instead of being spoiled  by the  entire Katz  clan, of  every generation , and  there are
plenty.	.
This getting inside a Jewish home, if you yourself  are not one, 1s  a
delicate operation, because although the place is yours once  you're inside it, they take their time before they ask you round, and don't like sudden unexpected visits, as at present. But this I can do to the Katzes, because some time ago I did Emmanuel a big, big favour without meaning to, i.e., I introduced him to a kinky character I'd photographed, called Adam Stark, who turned out to be a crazy let's-make-a-big-loss   publisher,   and   printed   a  bunch   of   Mannie's
 

 


82	COLIN  MA c:I N N F.S
poems,  which  hit  the  literary  headlines  for  a  while.  So  that,  for Auntie  This  and  Grandma  That  down  in  the  Borough   road,  I'm Fix-it  Charlie,  the  clever  boy  who  gave  their  young  soothsayer  a needf ul  hoist.  In this  world,  if  you  do  the  little  kindly  deed  just  at the right  moment,  the dividend's  enormous: otherwise,  it's soon  for­ gotten.  All  the  same,  Itook  the  precaution   of  stopping  the  cab, down  by  St.  George's  circus,  and  giving  J.Oung  Shakespeare  four­ pence worth of warning I was on my way.
The Katz lot-at least three dozen of them-live in a fine old reconditioned derelict, and Mannie himself came down there to admit me, wearing his uniform of blue-black corduroys, and brought me up into the best front room which I wish he wouldn't, because that meant, as soon as they heard a visitor was coming, the rest of the Katzes made it over to the favourite son to entertain  his honoured guest, and disappeared themselves into the purlieus. And there, looking just like someone straight out of the o.T.-those illustrated copies with Rebecca, or maybe Rachel, hearing some­ thing marvellous, three thousand years ago, beside a  well-was Miriam K., and there, doing his berserk performance on the parquet, was their youthful warrior product, Saul. Neither of them asked me why I'd come, or why I'd not been for  an  eternity,  which  in my book are two signs of civilized human beings-because, believe me, most hosts are bullies holding pistols at your head, but not this couple.
'And how are the Angries?Ienquired.
Actually,   Mannie   wasn't   in   on   the   Angries   kick,   though   he appeared   in   print   about   the   same   time   that   bunch   of   cottage journalists  first  caught the  public  nostril. Mannie's  verse, of  which  I can  dig  the  general  gist,  Ithink,  is  angry  only  about  the  grave, which  he  disapproves  of, but  for the  life  of  the  kiddos  living  round the Borough  and in  Bermondsey , he pens  nothing  but  approval.  His poems  are songs of  praise  of  youthful  London:  but  his  conversation doesn't   approve  of   anything  at  all.  In  conversation,   Mannie   dis­ approves  of  everything , particularly  of  what  you  last  said, whatever
it may be.
'Isee  they   gave   you   that   Memorial   Prize   thing,'   I said.   'I
meant to send you a Greetings through the post, but Iforgot.' 'They.didn't give it to me, son. I won it,' Mannie said.
 
ABSOLUTE  BEGINNERS	83
'Next, they'll be making you an o.B.E., or  naming  a  street  after you.'
'An o.B.E.l You think I'd accept that?'
'Yes,'  said  Miriam,  who  was  making  some  false  curls  out  of her
infant's real curls.
'Well, what's  high  enough  for you?' I asked. 'A life peer,  would
that do?'
'It's not a laughing matter,'  Mannie told me. 'In England,   they
don't  bribe  you  by  money,   but  by  trashy   honours.  People   prefer
them to mere money.'
'Not me, I'd settle for a bribe.'
'Flattery and respectability are sweeter than  L.s.d.' " You'd better change your mind then, and accept.' 'He will,' said Miriam, who was changing junior. 'Never. Not even the Laureateship.'
'Duke-you'd  like  that.  Duke  Katz  of  Newington   Butts  would
suit  you  fine.  Ican  see  you  in  your  robes  and  ping-pong  titf er.' 'Unlike  all  my  countrymen,  I  don't  care  for  fancy  dress,'  said
Mannie haughtily .
'Why you wear that velveteen creation, then?'
'Don't expect Mannie to be logical,' said his better half . 'So I'm not logical.'
'No.'
'You sure of  that?'
'Yes.'
'And when Imarried  you,Iwasn't logical?'
'No. You were desperate.'	· 'Why wasIdesperate?'
'Because you'd messed up your first marriage, and wanted   some-
one to put you together again.' 'So Imessed it up.'
'You  certainly helped.'
'Make a mess once, you can make another.'
'You  mean  us?  I  don't  think  so.  Besides,  Iwon't  let  you  mess  us
up.'
'No? You won't let me?'
'No.'
As this little bit  progressed,  the loving  pair  got  nearer  and   nearer
 

 

 


84	COL I N    MACIN N ES
to each other, till they were kneeling nose to nose, bawling each other out, and both clutching portions of the pride-and-joy.
'Miriam,' I said, 'your product's p-----g on the parquet.'
'That's not unusual,' said his loving Mum, and they busied them­ selves with rescue operations .
As I gazed down at this domestic scene, all bliss, I thought the corny old thought, why shouldn't all marriages  be  like  this-a quarrel that goes on forever and ties the couple up in closer, tighter knots? And why can't all mums be like Miriam, young and beauti­ ful and affectionate-and all girls, for that matter? Old Mannie certainly was a picker.
'You like a herring?' he said to me, looking up from behind his son's behind.
'Naturally, boy.'
'I get some. Don't pin Saul to the floor,' he told his  wife,  who gave him one of those 'Oh, well' glances, and started a little mum­ and-son thing with the juvenile- we understand  each  other,  don't we, man-child-born-of-woman?
I heard 1'.fannie beckoning me from outside the door, with a whisper you could hear down as far as Southwark bridge, and out in the corridor he said-as if continuing a conversation we'd already started-'So it's a touch? You need  a bit  dinero?  Five  pounds  do? Or three?'
'No, man. Not me.'
'Trouble? The bailiffs in? Got syphilis? The law? Need bail?'
'No,man. This is a sociable visit.'
'Girl trouble? Boy trouble? Horse trouble? Anything like that?' 'Oh, well . . . no, not exactly-but you know  Suze.'
'Certainly, I do. Nice girl-a bit promiscuous, if you don't mind a frank opinion.'
'She's marrying Henley, so she says.'
'Yes? There'll be a quick divorce, I prophesy.' 'Why?'
'Because  Suze  will  discover,  in  the  course  of  time,  that   she's
bringing more into the kitty than the rag merchant.' 'Of course! I wish you'd tell her so.'
'Not me! Never advise a woman-never advise anyone, for that matter.'
 
ABSO L U TE  BEG I N N ER S	85
'And till she fiu<ls out-I suffer?'
Mannie laid his hands upon my shoulders, like a rabbi blessing a young foot-soldier before a hopeless battle.
'She's got to suffer, son,' he said, 'before you  can  get her, and stop
suffering.'
'Nice lot of waste<l suffering all round.'
Mannie  looked  at me with  his  great big oriental seen-it-all-ages-
ago eyes. 'Sure,' he said. 'I'll get that herring _for ou:'	,.
Out in  the  kitchen  there,  I  could  hear  hun  smgmg-there s  on, at least, I thought, who'll never be a teenage vocal star. And back 111. the big room, Miriam got out some photographs to show me of Emmanuel, in a white shirt, collecting his award.
'Splendid,'  I  said.  'He  looks  like  that  Shelley  number,  crossed
with Groucho Marx.'	,
'He's sweet,'  said  Miriam,  running  a finger  down her  husband  s
photographic image.	,
'Bad snaps,' I told her. 'Why didn't you get me?
She didn't  answer that  one, and  said-turning  suddenly  upon  me that  way  women  do, to  catch  you  unawares,  and  as  if  all _the  con­ versations  that  they've  had  with  you  hitherto  were  ni:enmgless­ 'You  think  he's  got  talent,  really?   You  think   Manme s  got  real
talent?'	.
The answer  came out before  the thought,  which  is the  only kmd
of true one. 'Yes,' I said, and she said nothing more.
Incame the herrings, and the  poet.	.
'The trouble about this country,' he explained to us, p1cktng up a train of thought he'd dropped somewhere earlier on  and  le  to ripen  up  a bit  wherever  it was  he'd  dropped  it, 'is the  total  fhght
from reality in every sector.'
Miriam and I munched, waiting.	,	. 'For centuries,' this  Southwark  Shakespeare  said,  the  E glish
have been rich, and the price of riches is that you export reanty to where it is you get your money from. And now that the maket­ places overseas are closing one by one, reality comes home agam_ to roost,  but  no  one notices  1t,  although  it's settled  in  to  stay beside
them.'
Short pause. Seemed that a question was demanded. And so,
'And so?' I said.
 

 
86	COLIN   MACIN N ES
'A rud awa_kening is due,' Emmanuel said, smacking his lips around his herrmg, and gobbling it down like a performing seal.
I took up the old, old cudgels.
'A minute, Cockney boy,' I said. 'You talk of  "the English"­ aren't you one of us?'
'Me? Certainly. If you're born in this town, you're marked  by it for life: specially by this area, you are.'
'And so what happens to the English, happens to you too?'
'Oh, positively. I'm booked on the same Hight, whatever the direction.'
'So long as I know,' I said. 'I want you to  be  around  when  the big bills come in for payment.'
The chat had taken on suddenly an ever-so-slightly awkward edge, as chats will do, particularly when the tribal drums start beating in the distance-and I wanted Mannie to understand I did think him every bit a local, just as much as me  and  more and needed him, and only feared he might get tired of us, and ski. But no_w he had grabbed prince Saul, and clutched him like that Epstein thmg up by Oxford circus, and said to me,
'I write in the English language, boy. You take that  away from me, and_ the whole world it and I come out of, and you cut off my strong nght arm and other vital parts as well-let alone my liveli­ hood and hopes of fame. Three of my own  grandparents didn't speak a word of it. But me, I do, your speech is mine.'
'Grandmother Katz spoke English very well,' said Miriam. 'Never to ine, she didn't.'
Here young Saul belched.
'Listen,' said Mannie solemnly. 'I tell you a secret: England is dredful, an the English-they're barbarians. But three things of theirs I cherish most sincerely-the lovely tongue they thought up Go knos how and I try hard to write in, and the nosey instinct of their engmeers, and seamen, and explorers and scientists, to enquire, to find out why, and their own radicals that bounce up every century to Hay nd say them, never mind the risk. So long as they  have those thmgs I m glad to be with them, and will defend them . . . and everything else I can forget.'
_Mannie sai this so seriously, like he was taking an oath that might  land him  in  a gas-chamber,  but  he'd  keep  it. Admitted, he
 
A BSOLU TE  BEGIN NERS	87
was a bit conscious of saying it all, and of us his audience (par­ ticularly Saul)-but me, I believed him, and was impressed. 'I could do with a cup of tea,' I said, and this time Miriam went out to get it.
M. Katz arose and stretched himself and said, 'Heigh-ho-it's the human element. It's a wicked world.'
I by this time was wandering around this ghastly front abode­ ghastly, I mean, in its furnishings and whatnot, which hadn't caught up with the contemporary kick, but nice and cosy-comfy and well used, as front room furnishings not always are. Over in one corner, almost hidden like a chamber pot behind a curtain, was a small selection of select volumes, including several of Mannie's two pro­ ductions, one copy of each of these being bound  in  the  hide of some rare animal, and enclosed in an outer covering of velours.
'They're not a bookish lot, your elders and betters,' I suggested. 'Not on my side,' said Mannie K., stepping over to finger his thin,
beloved books. 'But come round to Miriam's father's place, and you'll see a whole public library, even stacked in the kitchen and the mod. cons., and most of them in German and in Russian.'
'Your folk are traders, Mannie?'
'Yes, but we have four rabbis in the family, if you include cousins,' he said with a ferocious grin, half pride, half horror.
'They didn't like it when little Emmanuel got on  the  writing kick?' I asked.
'There was a struggle. In Jewish families, Gentile boy, there always must be, over all major decisions, particularly about sons, a struggle. But as I went on working down the market, and  in  fact still do most of the week, they soon ungraciously surrendered. Especially when they first saw me on the telly.'
'And Miriam's lot?'
'They liked it even less. You see, I was supposed to be a bad match for the girl, and they thought, well, even if he's a peasant, at least he'll make the girl some money.'
'And so now?'
·	'Oh, they approve. Miriam's poppa's translated me into German and into Yiddish-but he's only got me published in the latter.'
'And they nice?'
Mannie gazed at the ceiling, stroking his tomes.
'I tell you  one nice thing  about them. The only three     questions
 
 

 

88	COLIN   MACIN N ES
they  asked  Miriam  when  she  dropped  her  bombshell  were,  "Is  he halhy,  is    e  a  worker,  do  you  love  him?"-in  that  order.  They didn t mention money till they saw me.'
Young Saul, feeling ignored, had joined  us. 'They're pleased about this one, anyway,'Isaid.
'What? With twelve grandchildren already? Perhaps they'll take a bit of notice when we have our twelfth.'
'Not on your Nelly, we wo't,' said Miriam, coming in bearing  us the char.
So   here  it  was:  my  visit  to  Mannie  and  Miriam  had  set  me  up, and  given  me  the  fortitude  to  have  another  bash  at  Crepe  Suzette. After all, even if it's undignified  for a man to chase a girl, what had I got  to  lose  in  my  position?  So Iasked  the  Katz  pair  if Icould  use thi blower,  and  called  up  Suze's w.2 apartment  where,  quite  sur­ pnsmgly-or  perhaps  not,  because  boldness  often  is rewarded-she answered  quite  politely,  and  said  to  me,  why  didn't  Icome  round and  catch  her  before  she  left  for  the  Lament  performance  down in s.w.3?
This time I took the metro, because I  wanted  to  ruminate  on what the best tactics would be to approach Suze-whether  to try and force a show-down over Henley, or whether just to bank  the fires, but keep them kindled till my tum came round one day.  But this was a mistake, I mean the tube thing, because by the time I arrived outside her w.2 address, I saw Henley's vintage Rolls was parked there, and the lights blazing happily on Suze's Boor upstairs.
Suze lives in a trio of Victorian bourgeois palaces that have been made over into Batlets for the new spiv intellectual lot, and on the old pillars underneath the porticos, instead of numbers 1,2 and 3, or whatever it should be, they've written Serpentine House, this 'House' thing being the new way of describing any dump the land­ lords want to make a fast fiver out of . You press a bell, and a constipated voice answers down a loud-hailer thing (or sometimes doesn't), and you state your business into a grille as if you were broadcasting to the nation, and then there are quite a lot of clicks, and buzzes, and in you go to a hall where your bollocks freeze, even in summer, and climb in an upended coffi11 called the 'elevator', and jerk up past blank walls like a pit shaft till you stop with a late lurch at the requested  number. At the lift gates-which  it needs   a
 
A BSOL U TE  BF.C I N N F.R S	89
strong man to open, but which close thmselves before you're ont­ there, on the landing, rather to my surprise, stood Henley.
You'll dig Henley straight away if I describe him a a cold quer:
i .e., he's  not  the  swin g-my-hips  camp  chatterbox  vanety,  or.a  s1d­ eyed  crafty  groping  numher,  or  the  batle-scarred  prachuhst  nail­ biting type, but the smooth, collcted, let_s-talk-th1s-thmg-over one.
'Good  evening,'  he  said  politely,  trymg  to  help  me  out  of  the
t>levator contraption.	.   ,
'Well, and good evening to yon,' Isaid. 'You've pinched  my grl.
Henley smiled just so slightly, and shook his hea ever so slightly too, and said to me  seriously, 'Naturally,  when  we re together,  yon
can still come and see her.'
'Can I!' I said. 'Yon think I'd go near her in those   circumstances?'
'Yes,' he said gently.
'Well, mister, then you don't know me!' Icried.
Hearing  this  frank  exchange  of  greetings  in  the  passage, .Szette herself  emerged  and  stood  there  looking  radiant:  Imean,  it  lS  the only  word  to  use  that  Ican  think  of,  she  realy  shone,  and  wore  a brittle  Cinderella-in-the-ballroom-scene   creation,  one  of  those  fra­ gile things that  girls, who  really are so tough,  as we all knw, adore to  climb  into,  to  make  us  think  they're  sweet  seventeen  m  person (which, in her   ase, in fact she was). She saw we'd  got off  to a dodgy start in our conversation,  so she came out  and  grabbed  us both,  one hand  apiece,  and  pulled  us  into  her  apartment,  and  did  all  those things  with  drinks,  and  fags,  and  radiograms  that  are  supposed  to
melt a polar situation.
But I was not wearing that.
'You  don't  mind,  Henley,'  I  said,  crunching  some  pretzls  .and
refusing the glass of Coke I hadn't asked for, 'if I speak my mmd . . The cat  sat on  an armchair,  legs crossed,  all laundry  and.hair­
dresser and dry-cleaner's, looking like a superior footman on his day off, but  still horribly  polite.  'Not  a bit,'  he  said. 'That  is, if Suzette
doesn't mind.'
'We  may  as  well  have  it,'  Suzette  said,  flopping  on  to    some
cushions, and opening up  a 2,000-page Yank  mag.	.
'In  the   first  place,'   I  said,  beginning   with   the   least obvious
weapon, ' Suzette is working-class, like me.' 'And me,' said  Henley.
 







 
 

 

 
90
'Eh?'
 

COLIN  MACIN NES
 
ABSOLUTE  BEG IN NERS	91
 
'My father, who's still living, was a butler,' the cat said.
'A butler,' I told him, 'is not working-class.  No  disrespect  tu your old Dad,  but  he's a flunkey.'
Suzette slammed down the mag, but Henley reached out what I think that he'd call a 'restraining arm ', and said to me 'Very  weJJ, I'm not working-class. And so?'
'Those cross-class marriages don't work ,' I told him. 'Nonsense. What next?'
'Suzette,' I continued, warming up, 'is young enough to be yom great-great niece.'
'Please don't exaggerate. I know I'm much older, but I'm not yet forty-five.'
'Forty-five! You're ripe for Chelsea hospital!' I cried.
'Really,' said  Henley,  'you  do exaggerate.  Take  all the  top  film
stars-Gable, and Grant, and Cooper. How old do you  think they are?'
'They're not trying to marry Suze.'
'Very well,' he said. 'You think I'm senile. Anything else?' 'Point number three,' I said, 'I leave to your imagination.'
. Henley uncrossed his legs, put neat, clean, effective fingers on either knee (I hope the creases of his pants  didn't slice him),  and said to me, 'Young man . . .'
'None of  that "young man".' 'Oh, you're a pest,' cried Suzette. 'You bet I am!'
Slightly raising his voice, Henley continued, 'As I was about to say . . . do you know that a great many marriages between com­ pletely normal people are never consummated?'
'Then why wed?' I shouted. 'It's what the French call . . .'
'I don't care a fuck what the French call it,' I yelled . 'I call  it just plain disgusting.'
Suzette was up, flashing flre. 'I do think you'd better go,' she said to me.
'Not yet. I haven't finished.' 'Let him go on,' said Henley.
'Let me my  arse,' I said. 'What  I  want  to ask you  is, do yo11 really
 
suppose  a  set-up  of  that  kind  will  make  Suzette  happy?  I mean
happy-do  you  understand  that word?'
Henley had also risen . 'I only know,' he said very slowly to me, 'she'll make me happy.' And he went over and collected himself another drink.
I grabbed hold of Crepe Suzette. 'Suzie,' I said. 'Do think!' 'Let go.'
I shook the girl. 'Do think,' I hissed at her.
She stood quite still, and rigid as a hop pole. Henley, from across the little room, said, 'Honestly, I do think Suzette's mind is made up, and I do think it best if you  accepted  the situation, at any rate  for the time being.'
'You've bought her,' I said, letting go Suzette.
She  aimed  a  swipe  at  me,  but  down  I  ducked ..  I  moved  over towards Henley.
'I suppose,' he said, 'you want to fight me.' 'I suppose I ought,' I said.
'Well, if you really want to, I'm quite agreeable, though I should warn you I'm a dirty fighter.'
'You're dirty all right,' I said.
'Well, go on,' he said to me, putting down his glass.  'Do for heaven 's sake either begin, or, if you don't want to, sit down and not spoil everybody's evening.'	,         .     ,
I noticed he had one hand inside his pocket.  Key rmg,  I  thought,
'or maybe a lighter in the fist.' But I was only making excuses, be­ cause I knew I really didn't want to hit the man-it was Suzette I wanted to hit, or hit myself, bash my head against a concrete wall.
'We're not going to fight,' I said. 'Bravo,' he answered.
Suzette said very slowly to me, 'This is absolutely the last scene of this kind I want to see. One more, and I just won't see you ever  at all, and please believe I mean it.'
'Thank you,' I said, 'for making yourself so clear. Good-bre. for now, if I recover my temper I may see you down at the Lament s.
'Just as you think,' Suze said.	.
Henley held out his hand, but this was too m uch, so with a sort of a wave I stumbled out of the door and had to wait several minutes in  the  passage  there,  hearing  them  nattering  behind  me, because
 






 
 
-
 
92	COLIN    MACIN N ES
that  blood	elevator   kept  going  up  and  down  with    Serpentine House   residents  packed   in  it,  and   wouldn't   even   stop  when  I
managed to get the steel grille open while it was between floors and stared down after it dropping into the abyss.	'
When finally I got out of that front door, aching like in a night­ mare, s I_ dived down the streets, I heard a kind of death-rattle breathmg J USt behind my ear, and whipped round to look, but there was no.body-was me. None of that! I cried, and broke all my re?ulahons and went into a boozer and had a quick double some. th.mg, and shot out again. I thought I'd go over the park, across the
wide, open, lonely spaces, which also would be a short cut to Miss Lament.
On  thi's  _north  front  of  the  Hyde,  the  terraces   are  great  white monsters,  hke. the  shots  you  see  in  films  of  hotels  at  the  Cote  de France.  Thee s     e terraces for miles, like cliffs, then  the Bayswater speedway  with  its  glare  lights  and  black  pools,  and  the  great  dark green-?ule par stretchf ng on like a huge sea. The thing about the parks is, m day hme they re all innocence  and  merriment,  with  dogs nd  perambulators  and  old  geezers  and  couples  wrapped  up · like
Judo performers on the green. But soon as the night falls, the whole scene reverses-into its exact opposite,  in fact. In  come the   prowlers
and_  t_h  gropers  and  the  cops  and  narks  and  whores  and  kinky eh.1b1hon  numbers,  and  the thick  air  is filled  with  hundreds  of  sus­
picious, p ering pairs of eyes. Everyone is seeking someone, but eve?one IS sc.ared to meet that him or her they're  looking  for. If you.re out of 1, you want to go inside to see, and once you're in , you re very anx10us to get out again. So in I went.
I tried not to think of Suze in there-and did. 'Suze Snze Suzette,' I said, and stopped, and I swear the thought of her  wa
mre' me then than I was. I sat down on a  bench ,  and  my  voice said,  Boy, do be reasonable.'
One thing was right,  I had  to  admit, in  Suze's smelly plans .  Until yu  know  about loot-I mean  really know, kuow  how  to handle  the big stuff, know  what  the  difference  is  between , let's  say, five  thous­ nd pounds  and ten  (which  are exactly  the same to me),  or what  it's
like  to  look  at  anything  and  say,  TU buy  it,'  or  how  the  mugs will	I
anc: for yot  if  yu  fling them  down  a  shower  of  sixpences-then certamly  you re  still  a  m ug  yourself.  The  hard  little  biting  brain
 
ABSO L tJ TF.  BEG I N N E RS	93
inside Suzette was decided to understand this money kick, and my lord, she was going to do so, come what may.
Ican't  say  I  really  minded  about  Henley  in  particular,  and  that twin-bed  marriage  thing  that  he  was  offering.  What  I  minded  was that  it  should  be  anyone  but  me-anyone  at  all.  When  she  played me  up with  her  Spade  Casanovas,  it  was  just  as  bad  . . . except  for this  very  big  except,  that  I  knew  those  adventures  had  no  per­ manence attached to them. I still had my way in.
Mannie had said, 'Wait,' but how could I possibly be that wise? Would he have waited long for   Miriam?
Perhaps  Suze  isn't  me,  Ithought  out  suddenly.  Perhaps  I'm  mis­ taken  about  this-she  isn't  really  Juliet  for  my  Romeo.  But  what does it matter, even if she isn't, if I feel she is?
'Fuck!' I cried out in a great bellow.
Three or so special investigators, who'cl been  approaching  my bench cautiously from out of the dark green, stopped in their tracks at this, and some melted. I got up. 'Can I have a light?' the boldest said, as I passed by.
'Don't take a liberty,' I said, and hurried on.
I got on a stretch of curving  roadway  that  was  so  dam  black  I kept walking off it, and getting tangled in the whatsits that they put there to say please-keep-off-the-thing . A light shaft suddenly ap­ peared from nowhere, and by me there flashed a pair of mad enthusiasts in track-suits, puffing and groaning and looking bloody uncomfortable   and   virtuous.  Good   luck   to   them!   'God   bless!' I
shouted after.
Then unexpectedly, I came out on a delightf ul panorama of the Serpentine, lit up by green gas, and by headlamps from the cars whining across the bridge. I picked my way down by the water, and trod on a lot of ducks,  they  must  have  been,  who  scattered squawking sleepily. 'Keep in your own manor, where you belong,' I told  them,  chasing the little bastards  down  into the lake.
I was now beside the waves, and I could just make the sign out, 'Boats for Hire', and saw them moored fifteen  feet  away from me out there. So thinking, why not? anything to relieve the agony, I sat on the grass, and took off my nylon stretch  and  ltie  clogs, and rolled up my Cambridge blues, and stepped into the drink like King Canute. By the time I reached the first boat, I was up to my navel
 

 

 


COLIN   M ACINNES
 


'Down there.'
 
ABSOLUTE  BEG IN NERS	95
 
like the hero in an Italian picture, and hoisted  myself  into the   thing
and, after a lot of bother untying a skein of greasy cables, I managed to put out to sea. As soon as I was in the middle, I let her just float along.
I ay there, ruddy uncomfortable, gazing at the stars, and thinking agam of Suze, and of how absolutely nice it would be if she was there, she and me. 'Suzie, Suzette,' I said, 'I love you, girl.' And I washed my face off in the muddy, invisible slop.
Then I sat up inside that boat, and thought, how can I make a lot of  money  quickly,  if  that's  what  she  wants  to  get?  Naturally   I thought  of	iz,  of  his  plans  for  his  prosperity,  ·but  knew  I  cold ever make it that way-honest, not because  of  morals,  or anything hke  tat, but  because  that life, though  it  may  be  glamorous  in  its ay, 1S  so reallf  undignified , if that's the word. I want to be rich  all
nght, but I don t want to be hooked .
Wham! we slapped into the bottom of the bridge, the boat and I. I_ looked up and saw a geezer looking over, and I waved up to the illy sod, and shouted out, 'Bon soir, M onsieur!' and he said nothing m reply, but s arted throwing pennies down on me, or maybe they were doar. bits, I couldn't see, and didn't care to, because this character s idea of having a ball struck me as most dangerous. So I rowed on to the other bank, and disembarked just at the Lido and
?ad to climb. a fence to get out of  the enclosure,  and ripped    yself m several painf ul places.
Th law, as anyone who knows it will agree, has a genius fo showmg up not when you're doing something, as it should, presum­ abl , but when you're quite innocent and have just done something. This cowboy flashed his lighthouse on me as I was putting on my shoes and _socks, and stood there saying nothing, but not dowsing that annoymg glim.
Bt I was ?etermined he'd have to say the opening word, which he.did  y askmg, after several long minutes, 'Well?'
Havmg a paddle, officer,' I said. 'A paddle.'
'That's what I told you.' 'That's what you tell me.' 'In the old Serpentine.' 'Yeah.'
 
'Down there, you say.'
This  conversation  seemed  to me  quite mental,  so  I  got  up, and
said, 'Goodnight, officer,' and started off, but he said to me,   moving
up, 'Come here.'
So naturally, I ran.
One thing you learn  about the law is that they  don't like   running
because their helmets usually fall off . What's more, they don't like any kind of  physical  effort-in fact, the  one thing  coppers  all have in common, apart from being tramps, is that they have a horror of physical labour of any kind, particularly manual. Just look at the expression on their faces when you see a photo of them  in  the papers, digging among the rushes for the killer weapon! So if you're fast on your feet, and there's only one of them, you can fairly easily elude  them,  which  I  did  now  by  dodging  behind  that  Peter Pan
erection, and diving in some smutty bushes.
'Further  on, mate-get  further  on' a voice  said,  as  I'd inconsider-
ately got entangled with  a bird  and client, which  of  course wasn't my intention, so I bowed myself out, and got up on the road  again and over it among the  great  dark trees,  far  darker  than  the  dark sky up behind them, and I started walking normally, like  some serious kiddo who's gone out nocturnal bird-watching, or learning poetry by heart for a dramatic evening at the borough hall. After trampling by mistake over some flower beds, for which I   apologize, I came out on the south side of the Hyde, and escaped through the ornamental  gate into the embassy section that starts up round   about
there.
If attending a teenage party, or in fact one of any other kind, I'd
naturally wear my sharpest, coolest ensemble-possibly even my ivy-league outfi I got  for  I_!le  last  year  rom  his  PX.  But the Lamei1t would be disappointed if, billing me to her public as a teenage product, I didn't show up in my full age-group regalia. So I wasn't  embarrassed by my non-Knightsbridge  clobber, but only  a bit at being drenched downwards from the hips: however, I was hoping they'd accept that as just a bit of teenage fun.
So I rang the Dido bell. And, as often happens when you attend   a
party, another cat arrived on the doorstep at the same moment. Usually,  they  don't  address  you  until  properly  introduced within,
 
96
COLI N  l\f A C.IN N ES

but  this  one was  something  of  an exception,  because,  without  even
telling me his name, or anything, he smiled and said, 'You for the tigress's den  as well?'
I didn't answer that,  but  smiled  back  just  as  politely  (and  with just as little meaning) as the cat-who was one of those young men with  an  old  face, or old  ones with  a young  one, hard  to  tell  which :
anyway, he had a very sharp  top-person  suit  on,  which  must haw cost his tailor quite a  bit.
" You've known our remarkable hostess long?' he  said.
'That's how it goes,' I answered, and we passe<l inside the block together .
No need for a lift this time, because Dido has a  ground  Hoor thing around a patio out the back, which is even selecter than a penthouse, in my opinion, because it's somehow more unexpected: I mean the patio, which was very large for London, and  still full of gaps in spite of a fair number  of  hobos  already  milling  around there. Lament's one of those persons who, when she throws a party, and you've just arrived, you don't  have  to  hunt  around  for  her under the cushions  or in the toilet, to say hullo, because  she's  felt you directly you come in, and is on the scene immediately with a merry word of greeting. Up she glid, wearing a white  hold-me­ tight creation, like an enormous washable  contraceptive,  and  with her ginger hair wind-tossed and tousled (I'll bet it took her all of half an hour), and with her radar-eyes gleaming on the target,  and with her geiger-ears pinking big discoveries, and with her Casualty­ Ward-10 hands slicing through the hospitable summer air, and  with
her feet, claws withdrawn inside the pads just for the present, very successfully and snakily carrying the lot.
'Oh, hul-lo,  infant  prodigy,' she said to  me. 'You've  already met
my ex-lover Vendice? Are you hungering for something? Have  you wet  your pants?'
'Yes, yes, and no,' I told her. 'I've come straight up to you r tenement from a bathe.'
But of course,' she cried out, but in a low, rasping voice, as if someone  had  cut six of  her  vocal  chords. Then  she leaned  her hea<l
until her carroty locks swept by my neck, and said, 'Any items for the column?'
'Lots. How's the price these days? '
 
A BSOLU TE  BEG IN N ERS	97
She put her lips on my neck skin without kissing, actually. 'You'll tell me for love,' she said.	.   ,
'Yes.  All  the  dirt.  A bit  later,' I  assured  her.  But  she d1dn t  hear
me  because she'd swept on  along her mossy hostess's   track.
1' think  Di<lo's the most  unscrupulous  person  I've  yet  met,  though I  don't mean  especially  about  money.  What  I mean  is, she  believes everything  in  existence   is  a  deal.  For   example,   when . she  came pounding  around  the  teenage  ghetto,  collecting      atenal  _for  her articles  I've  referred  to,  she gave  all the  kiddos  the  impress10n  that she  wanted  to  buy the  teenage  thing,  like somebody  booking  a  ro':" of  ringsides  at  the  circus.  And  when  she  looks  at  you,-and  she s always  very  pleased  to  see  you-her  eyes  say  she  knows  just  ho:,v much  your  price  will  be.  She's  somewhere  betwen  38   n  58,  I d say  and  this  flat of  hers  in  the Knightsbridge  red-hght  district  must be    orth  a bit more  than  ever her  column  pays  her, so there  are no doubt  other  items  in  reserve.  The  sex  angle,  so  the  chatter  goes, isn't  bent  in  any  direction,  and  no  one  in  particula 's  in  evidence around her  garret, though  there are said to be  favourites, and some­ times the industrial  daddies from the  North  move  in a while  to look
around.	h 'd
I gazed  at the saleroom, to  see what  srt of  customers  s   e
mustered .  I  don't  know  if  I  can  convey  this  idea  exactly,  but  te general  impression   they  all  gave  was  of   being  well  stoked  wit nourishment ,  well  decked  out  in  finery,  but  all  on  someone  else s money.  This  is  a  curious  thing-that  you  can  usually  tell  who  has their own loot, who not: rather  as you  can the really sexual numbers, hoys and girls, from all the others, I mean  the serious operators, by a sort of  quietness, of purpose, of relaxation  they possess.	.
llp  came  the  Hoplite.  He  had  on  some  Belafonte-style,  stra1gt­ from-the-canefield  (via  the  make-up  room)  kind  of  garmens,  wth too   many   open   necks,  and  tapering   wrists,   and   shoes   hke   tm­ openers,  all in light  colours except for some splashes of  mascara  that
gave his eyes melancholy  an<l me.w ing.      plucked  at my arri;i, and
told me, with  an agonizing sigh, 'Look, yon s the Nebraska  boy.  .
I saw, chatting away beneath the pergola , a  perfectly  ordmary young us product-fresh, washed an? don?le-rinsed as_ they manu­ facture them  in  thousands  over there.  Cute,  I told  Hophte.
Cute! Oh, lordy me!'
 

 
98	COLI N  M ACI N N ES
'Well-dynamic, then.' 'That's a bit better.'
'You hitting it off, you two?'
·Ah, woe . . . !'
The Hoplite gripped my arm, gazing to  and  fro  languorously from the Nebraskan one to me, and said, 'It's  ghastly,  you know. He's ever so friendly to me, and cheerful, and sometimes even grins and reaches out and ruffles my hair.'
'Painful. I feel for you.' 'Have pity! Ah me, ah me!'
'Ah you, all right. Where's the lush hidden?'
'It's not. You help yourself from the sideboard, just like that.'
I worked my way over with young Fabulous, who eased aside the multitude with his shapely tail.
'Ah-ha, you remind  me,' I told Hop. 'The Call-me-Cobber  number wants  to  sign  you  up  for  a  television  thing'-and  I  told  him  about the   Lorn   Lover   programme   project.   The   Hoplite   looked   very dubious indeed.  'Of  course, you  know  I'd love to have  my face and figure   up   there   in   between   the  commercials,'   he   told   me,   'and naturally,  I'd  love  to  appear  before  the  nation  to  tell  it  all  about
Nebraska.  But do you think, really, public opinion 's ripe yet for any­ thing so bold?'
'You could say it's a deep and splendid friendship that unites you.' 'Well, in a sense it is.'
TII speak to C.-me-C., then.' 'And I will to Adonis.'
Standing there alone, clutching my lime-and-tonic, I was accosted by one of those numbers you always meet up with at a party,  and she opened up to me with,
'Hullo, stranger.'
'Hi.'
'How are you called?' 'And you?'
'You tell me.'
'David Copperfield.'
She shrieked. Tm Little Nell.' 'There you go!'
'What do you do?'
 
ABSOLUTE  BEG I N NERS	99
'Only on Saturdays.'
'Naughty. No, I mean your job.' 'Photographic work.'
'For Dido?'
·I'm free-lance.'
'Plenty of windmills to tilt at?' 'That's how it goes.'
'Which end of town you live?' 'The end I sleep in.'
'No, seriously.'
Here they always give you the, 'But I'm interested in you,' look. 'Round w.10.'
'Oh, that's unusual.'
'Not to those who live in w.10.'
Here, having a little thought to wrestle with, her brain started pinking.
'Know everyone here?'
'Everyone except you.'
'But you  do know me. I'm Little  Nell.'
You see what I mean?  Honestly,  that's  what  parties  always  turn out to be. All the pleasure of a party is going there, up as far as the front door only.
Bits of the company had started dancing, but I didn't want to join in this activity, because either they were doing that one-two, one­ two ballroom thing, which makes everyody look like waiters and usherettes out on their annual rave, or else, if they were jiving, they were au of them frantic and alarming, like a physica C culture demonstration by a bunch of cats with colic, knocking themselves out quite unnecessarily, because the real way to jive is to swing your body, not your legs and arms. I must admit some of  the birds  tried to get aholt of me, on account of the prestige of the teenage per­ formance, but I pleaded not guilty, and made it over to the pergola. There I unhitched my Roileiflex, and took a few pictures  just  to keep my hand, in, and for a rainy day.
'I'd like some of those, if they're successful,' said a gent standing there beside me.
This gent, who wore a north-of -Birmingham suiting, was the one exception   to  the   thing   I   said   earlier   on   about  their   all, myself
 
100	CO LI N  M A C:I N N ES
included, being a lot of parasites arn1 po11ces : I mean, he looked as if it was on himself that he depended-you know,  substantial,  and not throwing it all up at once. And this turned out to he the case, because he told me he was a husiness ma11, a man ufacturer in the motor industry, and believe me, I got <p1ite a kick out of knowing him, as I had never actually met a business man  before-in fact, hardly believed  that they existed , though  realizing, of  course, they
must do, somewhere.
'Good for you, chairman!' I said to him, pumping his business­ manly paw. 'If you ask me, you commercial cats are the only  Ont's that really keep the nation sliding off its arse.'
'You think so?' the number asked me, giving the 'amused smile'
the seniors turn on whenever anything intelligent is said by an absolute beginner.
'Naturally, I think it,' I told him, 'if I've just said it.'
'Not many would agree with you," he said, beginning to latch on to my conception.
'You don't have to tell me! Turn on your telly, or your radio,    and
do you ever catch anything about business men? Does anyone write books about them in the paperbacks? And yet, don't we all live off what you do? Without you tycoons, there just wouldn't  be  the money for the rent.'
'You're very Battering,' this industrial number said.
'Oh, shit!' I cried. 'Will no one ever take my ideas seriously?' The balance-sheet product started to laugh soothingly, so I grabbed him by the lapel of his family-tailor hopsack, and said,  Look!  ngland was an empire-right? Now it isn't any longer-yes? So all it s got to live on will be brains and labour, i.e., scientists and engineers and business men and the multitudes of authentic toilers.'
The cat looked surprised and pleased.
' Mind you,' I added, just to bring him down a bit, Tm not saying business is difficult. I don't think it's difficult to coin loot, provided you're  really  interested  in  it-provided  it's your  number-one obses-
sion.'
'I'll not  disagree with you  altogether  there,' the boardroom  prod-
uct said.
'Most of  us think  we're interested  in making  money,  but    we're
not: we're only interested in getting our hands on someone else's.'
 
A BSOLUTE   BEGINNE RS	101
He looked at me approvingly, as if he's sign me up immediately as chief tea-cup boy in his twelve-storey office block.
'And how is the car trade?' I continued.
'Don't tell a soul,' he said, looking around him, 'but it's pros­ pering.'
'Crazy!' I said. 'But of course,' I went on, 'you know you auto­ mobile producers are a bunch of murderers?'
'Oh, yes? Would you say so?' he said, smiling 'tolerantly' again. 'Well, in a sense you are. You read the figures of the slaughter   on
the highways?'
'I try to forget them. What are we to do?' This automotive one was still looking a bit 'amused', but I could see I'd touched him on a nerve. 'After all,' he said, 'if you took the cars off the roads tomorrow, the whole economy would collapse. Have you considered that?'
'No,' I said.
'In addition, the export industry on which, as you've said, this country lives, requires a healthy home consumption to sustain it.'
'There you go!'
'So death on the roads is the price we pay for moving the goods around, and earning currency abroad.'
I looked at the cat. 'You've said all this before,' I told him, 'to the assembled shareholders.'
'Good  heavens,  no!' the number  said.   a matter  of  fact, son, I say it chiefiy to myself.'
'Well,' I told this industrial chieftain, 'you know as well as I do,   if
you're  a driver, which I expect you  are, that there's  stacks of  goons sitting  behind  steering-columns  who  like  the  idea  they  may  mow j some victim  down.' I waited,  but  he  didn't  answer.  'An  accelerator/ and  a ton  of metal,' I went  on, 'bring out the Adolf  Hitler  in us all. They  know  there's no  danger  to themselves,  sitting  up  there  inside that tank, and if they make a kill, they know nobody's going to hang th.' 	I
The profit-and-loss  one now  began  to look  a bit  uneasy-I mean,'
not at my ideas, but me,-which always happens if you let loose an idea.
'Car driving,' I told him, twisting my knife  round  in the  wound, 'is the licensed murder of the contemporary scene. It used to be duelling and cut-throats, now it's killing by car.'
 
102	COLIN   MACIN NES
I saw I mustn't keep on rucking him, because, after all, this was a party, so I patted  him  on his hopsack,  just  like  he'd  done me,   and
_struggled   across  to  cut  in  on  Call-me-Cobber,   and  have   a  spin round with the ex-Deb-of-Last-Year.  But: 'Fair goes, now, fair  goes,' the  Cobber  said,  and  he  pulled  the  ex-Deb  out  of  reach,  and  all  I got for my attempt  was her making  apologetic  faces at me over the Aussie's beefo shoulders.
'Aboriginal!' said Zesty-Boy Sift.
This Zesty, who had come up now beside me, was the only other teenage product present at the  barbecue,  and  I  hadn't  spoken  to him yet for two reasons: first, because I meant to borrow five pounds from him, and wanted to choose my moment, and second, because this Z.-B. Sift had come up very abruptly in the world since I first knew him, and I didn't want to show I was impressed.
But  in  actual  fact,  I  was.  In the  far  dawn  of  creation  when  the teenage  thing  was  in  its  Eden  epoch,  young  Zesty  used  to  sing around  the  bars  and  caffs,  and  was  notorious  for  being  quite  un­
i doubtedly  the  crumbiest  singer  since-well,  choose your  own. But
I -here's the  point-the  songs  he  sung,  their  words  as  well  as  har­
;	onies,  were   his   invention,   thought   up   by   him   in   a  garage  in
I Peckham,  where  he  used  to  toil  by  day  and  slumber  in  an  old ' Bugatti.  And  though  Zesty  caught  all  the  necessary  us  overtones to
send the juveniles that he performed for, the words he thought up were· actually about the London teenage kids-I mean not  just 'Ah 'luv yew, Oh yess Ah du' that could be about anyone, but numbers like Ugly Usherette, and Chickory with my Chick, and Jean, your Jeans!, and Nasty Newington Narcissus which all referred to places and to persons which the kids could actually identify round the purlieus of the city.
',    So  far,  so  bad,   because   nobody   was  interested   in  Zesty-Boy's creative  efforts-particularly  the way  he marketed  them-until  one of  the teenage  yodellers  who'd  hit  the  big  time  remembered  Zesty, and  sold  the  whole  idea  of  him  (and  of  his  songs)  to  his  Personal Manager,  and  his  A.  & R. man,  and  his  Publicity  Consultant,  and his  Agency  Booker,  and  I  don't  know  who  else,  and  behold!  Zesty­ Boy threw away his own guitar and saved his voice for gargling and normal  speech,and  started  writing  for  the  top  pop  canaries,  and made piles-I mean  literally piles-of  coin from  his sheet, and disc,
 
ABSOLUTE    BEG I N NERS	103
and  radio,  and  telly,  and  even  filmic royalties.  It was  a real  rags-to­ riches  fable:  one moment  Z.-B.  Sift  was  picking  up  pennies  among the  dog-ends  and  spittle  with  a  grateful  grimace,  the  next  he  was installed  in  this  same  Knightsbridge  area  with  a  female  secretary and a City accountant added to his list of adult staff.
'Those Aussies!' he said, 'have moved  in for the slaughter. Did    I
you know  there's 60,000 of  them  in the country? And  ever  seen  any  \ of  them on  a building site?'	I
I didn't reply (except for a wise nod), because the  matter  of  the · five pounds was now uppermost in my mind,  and  about  borrowing and lending, of which of both I have a wide experience,  I could  tell you several golden rules. The first is, come straight up smartly to the point: to lead up tactfully to the kill is fatal, because the candidate sniffs your sinister intention and has time to put up barricades. So I said, 'I want a fiver, Zesty.'
Zesty-Boy, I was glad to see, observed, on his side, the first golden rule of lending, which is to say yes or no immediately- if you don't, they'll hate you if you refuse, and never be grateful if you agree. He took out the note, said, 'Any time,' and changed the subject. As a matter of fact, in this case we both knew it was actually a gift, because in his Cinderella days I've often enough handed Zesty-Boy the odd cigarette-machine money, and as a shilling then was worth what a pound  is to him now, this really was only a repayment.    And I could add-since we're on this topic-that if you're in a position, ever, to be a lender, the two kinds of people you should most watch out for are not, as you might expect, the dear old boyhood pals of Paradise alley days, but any newcomer (because borrowers are attracted to fresh faces), or anyone you've just done a favour to (because borrowers think there where the corn grows, there's sugar­ cane as well).
'Eh?' I said to Zesty-B. because, with these meditations, I hadn't been following attentively the trend his conversation had  been taking.	'
'I said Dido's out for blood this evening. She's got the needle into Vendice, because he's not buying any more space in her fish-and­ chip organ, and she's losing her cut on all the full-page spreads.'
'Bad,' I said, glancing over at the number he referred to, who was the  one  I'd  met  earlier  outside  the  door,  and  who  was  under the
 


104	GOI.I N   M A CI N N ES	A BSOLUTE  BEGINNERS	105
 
arcade that ringed the patio, strip-lit with lamps all hidden, so that you always got only a reflection, and couldn't tead a book there, supposing that you'd wanted to.
'What  does he  do, this  Vendicc?'  Iasked  Zesty-Boy . 'And  is  that his baptismal  name?'
Zesty said yes, it was, a11d that Vendice Pa1tners' job was well up somewhere in the scaffolding of one of  those  advertising  agencies that have taken over Mayfair,  making  it  into  a  rather  expeusivt> slum .
'And why has Partners' pimpery taken their custom away from Dido's toilet-paper daily?' I asked Zesty-Boy .
'It may be that Dido's slipping, or the  paper's  slipping,  or  just that everything these days is falling in the fat laps of  the jingle kings.'
·I wonder why Dido doesn't do a quick change and crash-land in the telly casbah?'
'Well-could she?Imean, can a journalist  really do anything ele?'
·Isee what you mean.'
The time had now  come for me to Hatter the young Mozart  in him a little. 'I heard  one of your  arias on the steam, last  evening,' Itold him. 'Separate Separates, if I remember. Very nice.'
'Which of the boy slaves was it sung it? Strides Vandal? Limply Leslie? Rape Hunger?'
'No, no . . . Soft-Sox Granite, I think it was . . .' 'Oh, that one. A Dagenham kiddy. He's very new.'
' He sounded so. ButIloved the lyric, and enjoyed the lilt.'
Zesty-Boy shot a pair of Peckham-trained eyes at me. 'Yeah?' he said.
·Itell you, man. Idon't Hatter.'
'Compliment   accepted.'  Icould  see  the  cat  was  pleased.   'Yon heard they gave me my first Golden?' he said cautiously.
' Boy, Iwas delighted. For When I'm Dead , I'm Gone, wasn't  it? A million platters, man-just  fancy that!' How could the Sift kid fail to be  delighted?  'How  long  will  it  all last,  do you  suppose?'  Isaid  to him.
'Companion,  who  knows?  Igave  it  only  a  year,  two  years  ago. And still they come-performers and, what's more, cash customers.'
'Still only boys for singers? No signs of any breasted thrushes?'
 
'We've tried one or two of them, but the kids  just  don't  want to know.  No, for the minors, it's still  males.'
'And all those boys from Dagenham and  Hoxton  and wherever. You have to teach them how to sing American? '
'Oh no, they seem to pick it up-get the notes well up there in their noses when they sing . . . Though when they speak , even in personal appearances, it's back to Dagenham again.'
'Weird spiel, isn't it.'
'Weird! Child, I'm telling you-it's eerie!'
You  know  the  way  that,  when  things  start  to  go  amiss  at  a  fm" tion,  everyone  notices  it long before  they  actually  stop doing  what­ ever it was they're  doing-drinking, dancing,  talking  and  etcetera­ and  this  was  what  now  occurred,  because  a  battle  was  developing between  our  hostess  and the  Partners  number.  But  soon,  just  as  no one can  resist  listening  to  a bit  of  hot  chat  over  the  blower,  we  all turned ourselves into spectators at the gladiatorial show.
They  started  off  with  the  mutes  on,  playing  that  English  one-up game they teach  you  at  Oxford,  or  is it  Cambridge,  anyway, one of those  camp  holiday  camps,  with  Dido  saying,  at  the  point  Iman­ aged to tune in, 'Ididn't say barsted,Isaid bastard.'
'It's not your pronunciation,  Dido, that I'm ·questionii1g,' the copy­ writing cat was saying, 'but your  definition.'
'Very well, I withdraw it,' Dido said, 'and s8:"  you're  just  a harlot.'
' Really,  my  dear,  Idon't  think  I'm  a  woman .  Surely,  I've  given you proof  positive of that . . .'
'Only just,  Vendice, on1y just,' she said.
And  so and  so forth,  guest  and  hostess , both  verv  coc;l  and, what was  really  rather  horrible,  without  any  emotion  in  it  I  could  see­ and  the  f riends  looking  on  and  listening  with  that  kind  of  grin  the mob wear  at  a prize  fight  in the municipal  baths . Imust  be  a prude at heart,  because  this  thing  really  shocks  me-not  bawling-outs  and even  fights, of  course, but  this method ical, public  blood-letting . And [ must  be  a  snob, beca use  I  really  do  think  that  when  an  educated English   voice  is  turning  bitchy,  it's  a   quite  specially  unpleasant sound , besides  bei ng fucking silly, and  a11 utter  drag. So Iwas much relieved,  and  Ithink  one  or  two  others  were, when  into  the  middle of  a l l  th is stepped  wec.ld ing-bel b  H(0 1 iley with  my  Suze.
 
106	COLIN   M A CI N N ES
As it happened, I was adjacent to the stereo, so I slipped on some Basie, turned on the juice well up, and, with a low bow to Henley, grabbed the girl. Now if there's one thing among many Suze has learned from her Spade connections, it's how to dance like an angel, and enjoy it, and I myself, though perhaps a bit unpolished, have studied on hard floors around the clubs and palais and in all-night private sessions, and besides which, we know all each  other's routines  backwards-and  sideways  and  front  as  well-so  before long, there we were, weaving together like a pair of springs con­ nected by invisible elastic wires,  until  we  reached  that most glorious moment of all in dancing, that doesn't come often, and usually, admittedly, only when you're whipping it up a bit to show the multitude-that is, the dance starts to do it for you, you don't bloody well know what you're up to  any longer,  except  that you can't put a limb wrong anywhere, and  your  whole  dam  brain and sex and personality have actually become that dance, are it-it's heavenly!
When just a second we were  in  an  electric  clinch,  I said, 'Where you dine? He take you somewhere nice?'  And  she  said,  'Oh,  him!' Boy! Can you believe it? She said it just like that! So when we were close again a second, and the <::;ount playing wonderfully in our ears, and the whole Lament lot standing round us thirty  miles  or  so away,  I  cried  out  to  her,  'Is  he  you?  Is  he  really  you?'   And Suzette said, 'No, you are! But I'm going to marry him!' And at that moment the music stopped, because I'd jabbed the sapphire down too near the middle in the earlier excitement  of  the   moment.
So I bid everyone good-night, and do sleep well, and thanks for having me, and went out of the flat into the London dawn. It was dawn, as a matter of fact, already: or rather, to be exact, it was that moment when the day and night are fighting it out together, but you've no doubt whatever who will triumph. A cab was passing by, and slowed down politely for the wayfarer, but I  didn't  want to break into Zesty-Boy's fiver at the moment, and also wanted to remember what Suze said about 10,000 times, so I set off to foot it back across the city to my home up the north in Napoli.
 




I N J U LY
 








 
 






PICT U R E M E , up to the calves in mud at low tide beside the river, trying to pose the Hoplite and the ex-Deb up on a stranded barge. 'Don't fuss us,' the Hoplite said; and, 'Do hurry,' said the ex-Deb-of­ Last-Year.
This  was  the  spiel.  Events  of  the  last  month  had  convinced  me that  the  only  way  I  could  ever  hope  to  make  some  swift  dinero was  by  cracking  into  the  top-flight  photographic  racket-i.e.,  pro­ duce some prints that would  be so sensational that  I'd make the big time  in  the  papers  and  magazines,  and  even  (this  was  my  secret dream)   succeed   in   holding   a  fabulous  exhibition   somewhere   to which  all  my  various  contacts  would  bring  their  loaded  friends. When  you come to ponder on it, like I did for days, you'll see it's not so  wild  a  notion  as  it  might  appear.  After  all,  kids  do  make  big money  these  days, as I've explained,  and as for photography, well, it seems  very  fashionable  just   now  to  treat  photographers   like  film stars, the reason  being,  I expect, that the culture-vultures  get all the art  kick  they  want  out  of  snapshots,  although  actually  they're  dam easy  to  understand-and,  need  I  say, so far  as  that  goes,  to  manu­ facture.
But,  as in  everything  here  below,  I  had  to  find  my  gimmick,  my approach,  my  slant,  my  angle.  And  after  days  of  brooding  on  the problem,  I hit on a plan that, so far as I can see, can't miss. It simply is,  to  weave  a  story  round  the  two  contemporary  characters  that everyone is interested  in-1.e., the teenagers  and the  dbs. You  dig? The  teenager,   of   humble   origin-Prince   Charming   in   reverse-­ encounters   the  Poor-Little-Rich-Girl   debutante.   Daddy   and   Pop both  disapprove  (as  well  as  Mum  and  Mummy),  so  Teenage  Tom and   Diana   Debntante   have   to   meet   clandestinely   in   selected spots   about   the  _capital   (which   I  would   choose   for   their   crazy picturesqueness),    and   the   whole    collection,    when    completed, would   comprise   a  stark,  revealing   portrait   of   the   contemporary scene.
My chief difficulty was casting the two star parts, because although I kuow stacks of teenagers and a deb or two, I wanted persons I could rely on to keep the secret, and who would give me a lot  of  valuable  time  without  immediate  remuneration,  and   who,
109
 


 
110	COLIN   MACIN NES
most of all, would look sensational when recorded for posterity by my Rolleiflex. The ex-Deb was the obvious selection for the female role, since her looks, though, to my taste, completely meaningless, are simply gorgeous-I mean, she's so dam glorious she isn't real­ but the big question was, of course, would she accept? Well, thanks to Dean Swift, she did. Because the ex-Deb, though you couldn't precisely describe her as a junkie, climbs on the needle when being beautif ul is just too much for her, and the Dean, when I introduced them, was able to help her in the matter of supplies. If you're going to tell me hooking her this way is unethical, I'm perfectly willing to agree to that, but please understand my situation  in regard  to Suze is urgent and rather desperate, as the performance at the registry totalizator can't be long delayed, although  I haven't  succeeded  yet in discovering exactly when it is to be.
Now as for the boy, the obvious choice was Wiz-or, in fact, any­ one at all within the age bracket other than  the Fabulous  Hoplite. But Wiz isn't my best friend, unfortunately,  at the moment,  so it was the Hop I picked. The reason is that, though Hoplite doesn't consider himself, correctly, to be an authentic teenager at all, or, for that matter, exactly a Prince Charming, he really is extremely hand­ some and delicious and photogenic,  and the boy always has a  load of spare time lying heavy on his hands. The deal here was rather dodgy, because I had to reject on Hoplite's part what the courts  call a certain suggestion, and fixed it with him on the promise of a de­ luxe album of himself in classic poses, which he could offer as a birthday gift to his Americano.
If you've ever tried to assemble two colourful characters like the Fabulous and the ex-Deb in  the  same  place,  on  several  occasions, for a certain length of time, you'll realize what I've been up against these last weeks. Particularly as, to get the London fairy-story atmosphere I'm aiming for, I've had to take them in a tanker down in Surrey docks, and in the reptile  house  at  the  zoological,  and in both an ambulance and a hearse (that wasn't as difficult as it might seem), and also, actually inside the stables where our national toy soldiers groom their animals-which  was  a  Day-to-Remember  I believe I shall never  forget.
'No, no, no, no,' I shouted from the foreshore, because the  ex-Deb and  the Hoplite  had  actually turned  their backs on me.
 
A BSOLUTE  BEG IN N E RS	111
'No-what?' cried my heroine, tossing her locks about, and turn­ ing in a practised pose that pointed all her salient features.
'You do fuss so,' the Hoplite said again, standing up to adjust his slacks, and looking like an are-you-weedy? be-like-me, advertise­ ment.
I waded forward, and appealed to their better natures. 'Listen, amateurs!' I cried. 'It's your fronts that I'm paying for-the parts where you show some expression.'
'Paying us, infant!' said the female lead.
'If it's expression you want . . .' the Hoplite added. 'Besides, you've cut short a delightful conversation.'
I knew what that was. The Hop never tired of hearing of transac­ tions in the debutante market, and chatted his leading lady endlessly on this subject, especially when I asked him for a heroic or a grief­ ridden expression.
'Just one more try,' I pleaded, 'and do please recollect the script. The current situation is that Lord Myre is going to horsewhip his daughter's young heart-throb, and she's breaking the news  to him that daddy's on the way down with his posse.'
'Delicious,' the Hoplite said.
'It's daddy who gets horsewhipped these days,' said the ex-Deb­ of-Last-Year.
Picture, to re-cap, the scene. There, on the wharf, stood the ex­ Deb's  bubble-car   and  M.  Pondoroso's  Vespa   (because  ys,  Mickey
P. really had delivered the promised goods), and a band of on­ lookers with complimentary tickets, and up on the bridge above us, the City citizens scurrying to and fro, the men looking like dutiful schoolkids with their brief-cases and brollies, the women as if they were hurrying to work in order to hurry home again, and out in the stream, the craft like Piccadilly circus-on-the-water, and there in the quagmire me, and this temperamental Old Vic duo. The fact is, it was rather difficult to concentrate, because the whole panorama was so splendid, with the sun hitting glass triangles off  the water,  and the summer with the season really in its grip, making the thought of those short, dark, cold days long ago seem just a nightmare.
So we decided to break  off  for de;euner.
This we partook in a Thames-side calf up in a lane that, though I know  the  river  frontage  intricacies  like  the  veins  on  my  own  two
 


 
112	COLIN   MACINNES
hands,  I'd  never  discovered-but  then,  after  all,  who  does  know London?  We found the caff  by following some river toilers in there, and  when  we  entered  there  was  a  mild  sensation  (whistles,  stares, and dirty remarks  made sideways), because,  of  course, the Hop and Deb  are  both  exotic  spectacles  in  any  setting,  and  the  more  so, obviously,  here.  But  both  were  more  than  equal  to  the  situation, neither being the least put out by blinkless  stares, and neither being, in spite of all their camp and blah, the least bit snobbish-socially, I mean, at any rate-which is one reason whyIlike them.
So the ex-Deb, between whiles of her salt beef, swedes and dumplings, chatted anyone who chatted her, and  even  did  a tango with a hefty belted character when someone put some silver in the juke. And Fabulous, surrounded by gigantic, sweaty  manual  wor­ kers, did a great act of borrowing salt and pepper and miscellaneous sauces from lots of tables, giving as good as he got to the resident wittery, till some sour, quite exceptional,  customer  asked  him,  how was  trade?
There was a slight hush at this, and Fabulous asked the customer just why he wanted to know.
'I thought you might fancy me,' this trouble-maker said, looking round for the applause which, actually, he didn't get.
' You?' said the Hoplite, gazing at the monster. 'That's whatIsaid,' the cat rejoined.
'Well, now,'  said  Hop, in tones loud for all to hear.  'I don't  really think  so, no,  Idon't  really  think  that  you're  exactly  me.  But  if you bring  your  wife  along,  or your  grandmother,  or  your  sister,  Idare say you11 find  they'll  prefer  even  me  to  anything  they've  had  from you.'
'Prefer a poof?' the number said.
The Hoplite smiled round the room, rallying his supporters .
"Am  I really  the very  first you've  met?'  he  asked  the character.
·You'd better go straight home and tell your mother you've seen one, before she changes you.'
This got a laugh, and the cat could11't keep it up, and everybody changed the subject because, say what you like, although I know English workingmen are as crude as it's possible to be, they can be very civilized , when  they feel like it, in the matter  of  behaviour.
A  nautical  cat, wearing  a baseball  cap and  a bare  chest marked,
 
A BSO LU TE  BEG I N N E R S	113
'Pray  for  Me,  Mother,'  told  the  ex-Deb  that  his  boat  did  weekly trips  up  to  Scandinavia,  and  why  didn't  she  come  along  on  one­ everyone  on  board  would  he  delighted,  he  assured  her. The  ex-Deb said  she'd  certainly  consider  this  (and  Ibelieve  she meant  it), and the Hop asked  if  he could  sign on  as deckhand  for the trip,  and the nautical  numbers  all  said  greaser  would  suit  him  better-and  all this  chat  about  the  sea,  and  seafaring,  and  ships  sailing  out  of London,  made  me  begin  to  feel  that  hell,  it  really  was  ridiculous that  here  was  I, nearly  nineteen,  and  never  yet  left  the  city  of  my creation,  so Idetermined  there  and then  the very  next  thing I'd  do, would be get myself  a brand new passport .
When the place had cleared a bit,  we got together  to decide  on the next location, which I wanted to be on the tea-terrace of an open-air swimming pool, with Hop explaining artificial respiration methods to the debutante. I could  see that  the  Hoplite,  in spite of his little victory, was a bit upset by the earlier occurrence, so I said, 'Never mind, Hop, small minds live in small worlds.'
'Don't they, though!' said Fabulous.
'Speaking  personally,'   said  the  ex-Deb,  'and  I  may  be  wrong, because  I've  no  moral  sense  whatever-or  so  all  the  men  Ileave or   don't   like   in   the   first   place   tell   me-I   think   this   game   of putting  everyone  you  meet  in precise  sexual categories,  is just  a  bit absurd.'
'A drag, at any rate,' I suggested.
'No, just absurd . I mean,' said the ex-Deb, running her graceful fingers through her luscious locks, 'if everyone's entire life, every twenty-four hours, was filmed and  tape-recorded,  who exactly would seem normal any more?'
'Not me, for one,' said Hoplite, emphatically.
'Not you, darling, but not anyone,' the ex-Deb said.  'I  mean, where does normality begin, and where docs it definitely  end? I could tell you a tale or two  about  normal  men,  if I  felt inclined,' she added.
The Hoplite  accepted  courteously  a Woodbine  from  an adjacent
table. 'The world where they make laws and judgements,' he told us all, 'is way up above my poor bleeding baby head . But all I would ask is this, please: is there any other law in England that's broken every night by thousands of lucky individuals throughout the  British
 
114	COLI N   M A CI N N ES
Isles, without anything being done about it? I mean, if the law knew that thousands of crimes of any other kind whatever were to bP committed by persons of whom they know the names and addresses and etcetera, wouldn't they take violent action? But in our case, although they know perfectly well what's happen ing-who doesn't, after all? It's all so notorious, and such a bore-except for the sordid happenings in parks, and the classical choir-boy manoeuvre that every self-respecting bitch most cordially disapproves of, they ignore the law they're paid to enforce every bit as much as we do.'
'Occasionally,' I reminded Hop, 'they do select some more important victims . . .'
'Oh, yes . . . One or two files come up out of the pile, occasionally, I admit, but they always seem to pick someone who's helped in his career by the shameful publicity instead of ruined by it, as they'd fondly hoped, and even that sort of prosecution's  getting  rarer every day . . .'
We chewed the cud on this.
'I tell you, Hop,' I said, 'if ever the law was changed, nine-tenths of your queer fraternity would immediately go out of business.'
He gazed at me with his lovely, languorous eyes. 'Oh, of course, child,' he said. 'With the law as it is, being a poof is a full-time occupation for so many of the dear old queens. They're positively dedicated creatures. They feel so naughty, in  their  dreary  little clubs and service fiatlets. Heavens, don't I kno\Y!' Despite the summer heat, the Hoplite shuddered.
The ex-Deb reached out eight encircling arms and gave the Fabulous a big kiss, which he accepted bravely. 'Don't weaken, beautif ul,' she said.
'I won't,' said the Hoplite, rising.
I gave him a lift west on my Vespa, but untied his arms and dropped him off where he couldn't see my own destination, because this was a very private and, in fact, rather weird occasion, namely, my annual outing with my Dad to see H.M.S. Pinafore, at the late afternoon performance .
In the far distant days before  hi-fi  and LPs, my  Dad  used  to   have,
in our home-sour-home up in the  Harrow  road,  a  contrivance  that he'd made himself out of  old  bicycle  parts  and clocks  and  jam tins, on which he would  play, to anyone who'd  listen, which was of   course
 
A BSOLUTE   BEG IN N ERS	115
us kids, a selection of records that he'd come by, most of them with hardly any grooves left, so that you needed sharp ears, and a lot of experience, to tell what voice or instruments were playing, let alone the tunes. And among this collection, which  Dad  kept,  like  a miser's hoard, in a locked steel trunk under  a table  in the cellar, were a stack of G. &  S. things  which  we  all  adored,  and could sing every word of that we could make out from  the records.  And so, before Vern and I grew up to hate each other, and to learn from the other kids that all this G. & S. stuff was  square and  soppy, he and I used  to sing duets, and  sometimes old  Dad would  even join us in a trio, or sing the chorus parts that bored us, or were too diffi­ cult to understand . All this, I may say, took place when Ma was out,
or very busy .
This Pinafore one was always my and Dad's special favourite, I think chiefly because it has such a really miraculous opening­ friendly and sweet and gay and completely crazy-and many's the time we've sung the Captain's number with his crew together, even since I've grown to man's estate, and even when out, he and I, in some public place. So every year, when Dad's anniversary comes round, we go off to the matinee to see it, Dad of course telling nobody, and sit eating chocolates and ices in a state of rapture, sur­ rounded by the other G. & S. cats.
These cats, unless you've already seen them, you would really not
believe  are real. The chief  thing about  them  is that though, presum­ ably,  they  must  live  somewhere  in  the  capital,  you've  never  seen anything  like  them  anywhere  until  this  G.  &  S. celebration  brings them  all out  of  hiding.  The  thing  is,  although  they're  by  no  means all old-timers,  there's not  a single one of  them that looks as if, in any way,   he   belonged   to  the  present   day.  Their  clothes   aren't  old­ fashioned,   exactly,   but   home-made.   And   though   they're   lively enough, to judge by their  applause, they seem so completely  neuter, I can  only  call  it. They  look  very  good, of  course, but  only because no one has ever told them that there's such a thing as bad.
In fact, come to think of it, they're rather like Dad: he fits in here, among this audience . When I glanced along the row, I saw his face shining and smiling just like theirs, and his hand beating time with his programme -souvenir, and his lips forming the words just under ­ neath his breath-and sometimes above it, too, when it came to the
 

 
 


 
116	COLI N   MACIN N ES
ninth encore, or to the rousing choruses . And  when  the Captain sang that wonderful ditty with his crew, I knew my old Dad's greatest dream was to be  up there beside  him  on that  quarter-deck
-yes, here  and  now my poor  old  battered  parent  was  really  having a tremendous ball.
Come the intermission, I asked my Dad  for  news  of  Mum  and Vern . 'Your mother,' he said, 'keeps saying she wants  to see  you.'
'She knows my address,' I said.	·
'I think she's expecting you to call around at home.'
'I bet she is. Well, you tell Ma the GPO run an  excellent  service and a post card will cost her 3d.'	·   '
'Don't be too hard on your Mum, son.' 'You say that!'
'Yes, son, me. I don't like your taking a liberty where your mother's concerned.'
'Liberties! She's been taking diabolical  liberties  with  all  of  us for years!'
This little argument with Dad flared up quite suddenly and unexpectedly, as these often do, particularly among relatives, and J could see, of course, that poor old Dad could  never  admit  to  me Mum was a bitch without admitting  all the mistakes  that  he himself had     ade, and sacrifice his dignity. It was  also that Dad's very    con­
ventional, and comes the father sometimes, or tries hard to, and you can hardly let him down.
So there was a pause, and we looked round at the G. & S. cats, jabbering  delightedly away.
'And Vern?' I said fairly soon. 'He's got himself a job.'
'Nol'
'In a bakery : night work.'
'I give up eating bread from this day forward.'
Dad smiled, and the little film of ice was melted. 'And  the tenants?' I asked him next.
'There have been changes,' Dad said carefully. 'The Maltese are out. She's got some Cypriots instead.'
'Mum's certainly loyal to the Commonwealth.'
This just got by, and Dad. said, very decidedly, 'The Cypriots are gentlemen.'  I asked  him  why, and he said,  'They don't  despise you
 
A BSOI.lT TE  BEGINNER S	117
like the  Maltese  do. You  can  see, how  they behave,  they  come from  (
a people, not a tribe.'
Iwanted  to  lead  up to the  question  of  Dad's health,  but  this was tricky,  because  no  one  is  more  secretive  than  my  poppa,  and  also, how  could  I  do it  so that  he  wouldn't  guess  that  I had  anything to fear about him?'
'And how you been personally, Dad?' was all I could find to say.
·How I been?'
'Yes. I mean, how you been feeling in yourself?'
Dad stared at me. 'As usual,' he said, whatever that meant.
Actually, ever since Mum's disclosure, I was hatching a bit of a plot concerning Dad. It's like this. A year ago, when I was still quite a kid, I had food poisoning. That's what I had-but that's not what the doctors told me. What they said I had was almost everything except food poisoning. Believe me, I'm not making this up. When the local expe1t at the surgery threw in his hand, I went into hospital on the national health, where at least three of them probed me, gave me pills and injections, and discharged me as cured, exactly as before . For days I ran temperatures, and vomited almost hourly. I nearly went home again just then, back to my Mum and Dad, because I was beginning to get really scared.
Then I had an inspiration. Everybody knows that Harley street and thereabouts is where the best doctors ply their trade, and so I thought-why shouldn't they ply it now on me? I went up there one day, and decided that I'd choose the same street number as the day of the month it happened to be, and ring on the bell, and see what happened . The trouble was there turned out to be six bells-so I rang them all. If you don't believe this fable, please recall that I was drunk with fever, and just didn't care what happened: all I wanted was to reach somebody who knew. Well, the six bells were all answered by the same person: i.e., a sort of  nurse-secretary (I'd say nurse as far up as the bosom, and secretary above that), and I didn't have to choose which of the six medicos, because I collapsed in' the marble hallway, and Dr A. R. Franklyn chose me.
This was the medical cat who cured me. When I came round, vomiting again, and got him into focus, I saw a tall, serious young­ looking man who asked me to tell him all about it, which I did. He gave  me  an  hour's examination,  and  then  said, 'Well, I don't know
 
 


 
118	COLIN    MACIN NES
what's the matter with you, but we must find out.' I  can't  tell you how much these words of Dr F.'s impressed me.  Because  all the other Emergency-Ward-IO numbers had assured me they knew exactly what the matter was (though they  were  very  vague about the details of it), but Dr A. R. Franklyn of Harley street  said he didn't know-and got an ambulance and whipped me inside one of those eighty-guinea-a-week clinics where they pierce your ear-lobes, or change your sex for you, for three-figure fees-all without any mention of who was eventually going to pay what.
To cut a long whatsit short, with two days of poking things into every gap I owned, he found there was an abscess, and  pierced  it, and down went the temperature, and that was that, except that I had to stay on another week inside the hospital, which I didn't really enjoy exactly, on account of the nurses. I know nurses are wonderful and everything, and the whole dam community would collapse without them, but they're bossy. They know every man remembers that, way back in time, when he was  an  infant,  he  was  bossed about by women, and when they get you on that rubber mattress, between those sheets starched like cardboard, and never enough blankets, they work on those babyhood memories, and try to make you feel you're back again in that cosy little cot where females  used to rock you, and push bottles at you, and take every kind of liberty. But I got by. And every day Dr A. R. Franklyn would call in to say, 'Hi!'., and he always treated me, in front of those stacks of nurses,  as if I was a cabinet minister or someone-I mean, he was so wonder­ fully polite. Considering who he was, and me, I really think he had the nicest manners I have ever seen in anyone, and I shan't forget   it.
But the day they turned me loose, he didn't show up at all, and so I didn't have  a chance to thank  him,  or to raise the tricky  question of how all this medical luxury was going to be paid for. I wrote him, of course, but though he answered very nicely, he didn't refer at all to the financial aspect. So I did this. While I was in the place, I'd whiled away many a weary moment with my Rolleiflex, and some of the snaps I took of everyone were really rather  intimate and  funny, so I picked out the best, and made enlargements, and put them in an album, and dropped it in·at Harley street, and he wrote back  and said, if ever I fell into his clutches again, which he sincerely hoped I wouldn't, he'd make sure my Rolleiflex was confiscated first.
 
A BSOLU TE  BEG I N N ERS	119
You must see by now what was in  my  mind: it was somehow  to get Dr F. to see my Dad without  Dad exactly  knowing  why.
By this time, of course, we were back in  the auditorium, but  in the second half of H.M.S. Pinafore the marvellous magic of the first half gets lost somehow . . . I dare say old G. & S. were in a bit of a hurry, or felt the whole thing was becoming something of a drag­ anyway, the plot of the musical doesn't thicken, but evaporates. We both knew, of course, that there'd be this bit of an anti-climax, but it was a disappointment all the same, and we came out into the  night air together feeling a little bit lost and cheated.
'Well, there you go,' I said. 'Have a wet with me?' said Dad .
'Excuse me, no, Dad, I have to pound around a bit tonight . . .' 'Oh. See me  to my bus, then?'
'Sure.'
I took his arm, and he said, 'How's your work? You've  not been using your darkroom  much of late, I've noticed  . . .'
I  expect  even  Dad  was  beginning to guess  what  must  have been
obvious to anyone, namely, that having a darkroom at Ma's Rowton House was only an excuse to keep in  touch  with  him  . . . well, yes, and I suppose in a way her, too . . . because  up  in  my  shack  at Napoli, there were dozens of places I could develop in, and as for darkrooms, the electric fused or packed in at the meters with such monotonous regularity there'd be no lack of rooms dark enough to operate  in for hours.
'That  trip!'  I  said  to  Dad, to take  his thoughts away. 'That ship
trip up the river. Don't forget, you promised we'd do it this year for my birthday-all the way up to . . . where did you say it was?'
'Reading.'
'There you go! Well, that's a date, then? You'll book the tickets?'
Dad said yes, he would, of course, and I hoisted him on his number something bus, and waved him out of sight, and stepping back on to the pavement , was nearly crunched by a Lagonda.
'Careful, teenager,' cried  the driver, and he pulled  up  sharply  at a red.
I  get  so  tired  of   characters   in  motor  vehicles  behaving   like
duchesses, when usually the car's not even their own, but pa:rt-paid on the never-never , or borrowed  from  the firm  without  the board   of
 


 
120	COLIN    MACI N N ES
management's  permission,  and  all they  really  are  is  human  animals travelling much  too fast with their  arses suspended six inches above the asphalt-that  I stepped  round  smartly to give this  Stirling  Moss a  bawling  out,  and  saw  it  was  the  advertising  monarch,  Vendice Partners.
'Oh, hullo, trade wind,' I said to him. ·Where did you blow iu from?'
'Come and have a drink?' the Partners person asked me, opening his noiseless, squeakless door.
I held my hand on it. 'You haven't  apologized,' I said, 'for  trying to take my life.'
'Jump in. We're very sorry.'
'Come along, the lights are changing,' said the cat sitting by his side.
I thought quick, oh well, my Vespa will look after itself, an<l perhaps this V. Partners will be of use to me over my photographic exhibition, so I climbed in the rear seat, with a fine  view  of their still white collars and Turkish-bathed necks and un-hip  Jermyn street hair-does, and Vendice half turned and said. 'This is Amberley Drove.'
'Don't turn like that, Vendice!' I cried. 'How do you do,  Mr Drove.'
'You're nervous?' the Partners number said. 'Always, when I'm not driving.'
'Then you must be nervous very often,' said my fellow passenger, in a great big booming 'friendly' voice, and treating me to a doglike grin. 'The London track,' he continued, 'is becoming a real menace.' 'Some day, it'll just  seize up,' I told  him. 'It'll just  get stuck,   and
everyone will have to walk  home.'
'I can see you're an optimist,' he said. 'You bet,' I told him.
As you can see, I wasn't hitting it off with this Amberley Drove creation. I could see he was marked down by fate as one of those English products such as you'd make a circuit of five miles to keep away from, not beca use he's dangerous at all, really, but because these hefty rngger-bugger types are so dam  boyish,  and beneath their thick heads and thin skins, such bullies, longing, I expect, for the  happy  days  in  the  past  when  they  could  bash  the  heads  of
 
A BSOl.lJTF.  BF.C.INNF.RS	12 1
juniors at their academy, or the future ones when they hope to bash someone else's in some colony, provided they're too small and powerless to hit back .
'Amberley,'  said  Mr  P.,  'is much  concerned  with  questions  of the
moment. He's  a leader-writer.'
'Is that so,' I said. 'I've always wondered what they looked like. It
doesn't trouble you,' I asked the Drove one, 'that no one ever reads that stuff of yours?'
'Ah, but they do.'
'Who do?'
'Members	of	parliament . . .	foreign	newspapers . . .	City
people . . .'
'But anybody real?'
Vendice  laughed.  'You  know, Amberley,'  he  said, 'I believe the
young  man's got something.'
The Drove let out a laugh that would chill your bones, and said, 'The leader columns are angled at the more intelligent portions  of the population-few though  they  may be.'
'You mean I'm a dope,' I said.
'I mean you talk like one.'
We'd pulled up outside one of those buildings down by Pall Mall that looked like abandoned Salvation Army hostels, and Amberley Drove got out, and carried on quite a long conversation through the car door with Vendice that was evidently way up above my head, then said to me, 'I tremble to think, young man, that our country's future's in hands like yours,' didn't wait for an answer (there wasn't going to be one, anyway), and leapt up the steps, three or more at a time, and disappeared into his clubman's emporium.
I  climbed  over  the  back  seat  beside  Vendice.  'He's  too  young to
act like that,' I said. 'He should wait till he's a bit more senile.'
Vendice  smiled,  did  some  fancy stuff  among  the traffic,  and  said
to me, 'I thought you'd like him.'
I  wanted  to· broach  this  photographic  topic,  but  the  fact  was,  I found V. Partners  rather  paralysing.  He was  so cool, and polite,  and sarcastic, and  gave you  the  impression,  so much,  that  he  just  didn't believe  in  a dam  thing-not  anything-so all  I  could  find  to  say  to him, after  a  while, was,  'Tell  me,  Mr  Partners,  what  is  advertising
for? I mean, what  use is it?'
 
 


 
122	COLI N   MA CIN NES
'That,' he replied immediately, 'is the one question we must never pause to answer.'
We'd now stopped outside a classified building in  the Mayfair area, and he said to me, 'I've got some papers to  pick  up.  Would you care to look inside?'
I can only describe the atmosphere of the joint by  telling you it was like a very expensive tomb. Of course, all the staff had left, and the lights were dim where they ought not to be, which made it all  a bit sepulchral, but it did look, as a tomb does, or a monument, iike something made very big by people who want to prove something that they don't believe in, but desperately need to. Vendice's office was on the second Boor, all done in white and gold and mauve. The papers were laid out on the table in coloured folders with perspex covers, and I asked him what their contents were all about.
'About Christmas,' he told me.
'I don't dig.'
He held up one of the folders. 'This  about  a  product,'  he said, 'that will be flooding the stores, we hope, at Yuletide.'
'But this is July.'
'We must plan  ahead, must we not.'
I admit I shuddered. Not at the notion of his cashing in on Xmas, particularly, because everyone  does that, but  at the whole  idea  of the festive season, which comes up like an annual nightmare. The thing that's always struck me about Merry Xmas is that it's the  one day of the year when you mustn't drop in on your friends, because everyone's locked tight inside his private fortress. You can smell it already when the  leaves  are  getting  golden,  then  those  trashy cards begin arriving which everyone collects like trophies, to show how many pals they've got, and the horror of it mounts right  up  to that moment, round about 3 p.m. on the sacred afternoon, when the Queen addresses the obedient nation. This is the day of  peace  on earth and goodwill among men, when no one in the kingdom   thinks of anyone outside it, let alone the cats next door, and everyone is dreaming cosily of himself, and reaching  for his  Alka-Seltzer. For two or three days, it's true, the English race  all  use  the  streets, where they never dare to loiter for the rest of the long year, because then streets are things that we must hu rry through, not stand in, students sing ghastly carols in railway stations and shake collecting
 
A BSOLUTE  BEG I N N E RS	123
boxes at the peasants to prove the whole thing's charitable and authorized, not bohemian, and when  it's all over, people behave  as if  a  disaster  had  just  overtaken  the  entire  nation-I  mean, they're
dazed, and blink as if they'd been entombed for days, and are awaking up to life again.
'You look thoughtful,' the Partners number said.
'I am! I mean, the idea of planning for all that in mid-July. I'm really sorry for you.'
'Thank you,' he told ·me.
Then I took a swift grip of myself, and, sitting down firmly on a sprung white leather sofa, so that he couldn't throw  me out  before I'd ended, I told him of my plan for the exhibition, and asked  what he could do about it to help. He didn't laugh, which was certainly something,  and  said,  'I've  not  seen  any  of  your  photographs,    I
believe.'
'Dido's got some . . .'
'Oh-those . Yes. But have you anything more  exhibitable?'
I whipped out a folder from my inside breast, which I'd been carrying these days for emergencies like this, and handed it over to him. He looked at them carefully against the light, and said, 'They're not commercial.'
'Of course not!' I cried. 'That's the whole point about them.' 'They'd need  presentation,'  he continued.  'But they're  very good.'
He put them down, looked at me with his 'amused' smile (I could have smacked him), and said, Tm a very busy man. Why  should  I do anything for you?'
I got up. 'The only possible reason,' I said, looking him as  coolly in the eye as I was able, 'would be because you want to.'
'It's a very good one,' he said. 'I'll do it.'
I shook his hand. 'You're a nice cat,' I said.
'There, I'm afraid,' he told me, 'you're really very much mistaken. Shall we have a drink?'
He went slowly to a mirrored chest. 'Tonic for me,' I said, 'and thank you.'
I  turned  down  V.  Partners'  offer  of  a  meal,  because  I've  always found  that,  whenever  someone's  done  you  an  unexpected  favour  (I mean,  as  u nexpected  to  them  as  it has  been  to yourself ),. it's best to keep  right  out of  their  way  for just  a  moment,  so that  their  promise
 

 

 

 
124	COLIN   M ACIN NES
can  bite  into  their  consciences  a  bit,  otherwise  they're  apt  just  to talk the thing away to death immediately.  So Isaid good-bye to him for now,  and headed  it out of  the  deserted  Mayfair  area,  because  I wanted to look in at a jazz  club, for purposes best known.
You 'll have  dug, of  course, that  the  Dubious,  which  I  referred  to earlier, i not a jazz  club. It's a drinking club where  some of the jazz community  foregather, but a jazz  club is a much  bigger place where fans go to dance and listen, and not drink at all, except  for softs and coffees.  The  one  I  was  calling  at  is  the  Dickie  Hodfodder   Club, whih  consists  of  an  enormous  basement,  a  flight  of  concrete  steps leadmg down  thereto,  a commissionaire,  who  does nothing,  a  ticket vendor  who  sells  tickets,  the  aforesaid  soft  and  coffee  bars,  several hundred fans of either sex and, of  course, the Dickie Hodfodder  ork, ld by Rchard  H. in person, playing away merrily a sort of  not  very tidal mainstream  and, alternating  with  them, on  certain  evenings,  a group called  Cuthberto  Watkyns  and  Haitian  Obeah,  of  which  the less  said  (and  heard)  the  kinder.  My  object  in  going  was  therefore
not artistic, but because I thought I might catch a character called Ron Todd.
This Ron Todd is a Marxist, and closely connected with the ballad-and-blues movement, which seeks to prove  that  all  folk music is an art of protest, which, fair  enough,  and  also---0r,  at any rate, Ron Todd seeks to-that this art is somehow latched on to the achievements  of  the  USSR,  i.e., Mississippi  jail  songs  are in praise of sputniks. Ron has some powerful contacts on the building sites, an what I wanted to ask him was if we could somehow arrange to hoist the ex-Deb and the Hoplite and my own good self and camera, up on top of one of those mammoth cranes along the south bank, and take some snapshots of the scene. Why I thought I might find him in the Hodfodder place was that I knew he  admired  the male vocalist in the Cuthberto Watkyns ensemble, who had  some songs in  dialect  French  about  the resistance  movement  to Napoleon, I think it was,  of  the last  King  of  the Zombies,  which  Ron  wanted to have  him  perf01m  at a ballad-and-bl ues frstival  he was  MC-incr in the  ice-rink up there on Denmark  Hill.
But, as a matter of fact,  when  I  got  down  into  the  sub-soil, the first person who accosted me wasn't Ron, but the last one I expected, which was Big Jill. She was weariug her suedette jeans  and a   woollen
 
A BSOL U TE  BEG IN N E R S	125
cap with a Jong hanging bobble, and  was  sitting  at  a  table with some empty Pepsis, looking miserable . But  when  she  called  me owr. her voice sounded loud and clear  above  the  Hodfodder comho.
'Alone, Jil!P' l said. 'All the young starlets too busy to keep   you
company a while?'	·
·Sit down, stud,' she said, 'and feast your eyes upon  a visiou.'.
'Where?' I asked,  thinking  she  could  hardly  mean  the personnel of the R. Hodfodder band, though she was staring intently in their dirt'ction. 'In just  a moment  now,' she said.
So I stared too, over the hundred  heads of  the kids whipping  it   up
in the small central space for dancing, or standing  around,  all  in their sharpest garments, the boys tapping a knowledgeable toe or rocking slightly, the chicks looking a bit restless, eyes wandering, because, say what you like, the birds don't go much to the clubs to listen. When after a bit of nonsense on the drums, R. Hodfodder gripped   the  mike,   and  told   us  his  vocalist,   Athene  Duncannon,
would now be with us.
Big Jill rose four inches off her seat and gripped a Pepsi bottle.
Miss A. Duncannon was quite okay, and the kids certainly enjoyed her, but I must say I do think it's a mistake for young white English girls to try to give an exact imitation of Lady Day, since  the.bst possible  imitation  that's  conceivable  would  come  about   o   on miles from what Billie H., at her best, can do to you, which is turn you completely over, so that you can't bear to hear any other singers, at any rate for an hour or so after. However, from Big Jill's point of view, I could quite see the situation, because this Athene D. was a highly flexible creation, who wore her dress tighter than her skin beneath it, and glared at the assembly in that imitation-woman man­ ner that's getting to be fashionable among white  us female vocal­ ists, if you can judge  from the poses on the LP sleeves.
'Oh!' cried Big Jul.
'Where have you been  hiding yourself?'  said a voice.
This was Ron Todd, who'd come up and  stood  by  the  table, looking scruffy and disapproving, in the correct ballad-and-blues manner, and who also was one of those people who believe that, if they haven't seen you for a while, then you must certainly have been out of town, or died, because they see   everyone.
 







 
 


 
126	COLIN   MACIN NES
'Yes, long time no see,' I said to him. 'Come over here, I want to talk to you.'
But when I got him in a fairly vacant corner, and started my spiel about the mammoth crane, I could see he wasn't listening,  but  glar­ ing across above the innocent and cheery  faces  of  the  Hodfodder fans at a number who was coming down  the  steps, wearing  some very fancy schmutter: mauve, button-two tuxedo, laced shirt, var­ nished  pumps with  bows, and, on his arm, a nameless  dame.
'That's Seth Samaritan!' cried Ron.
This was more or less how K. Marx himself might speak of the head of the Shell Oil company (if there is one), because S. Samaritan is the number-one villain of Ron's picture-book-and not only of Ron's-the reason being, that he was the nrst to see, a few years back, that jazz music, which used to be for kids and kicks had money in it, and opened clubs and signed up bands, and brouht in talent from afar, and turned it all into minks and Jags and a modest little home at Teddington. I tried to get Ron back on top of that south bank crane again, but it was heavy labour.
'I'd like to put him in!' cried Ron, waggling  his briefcase  because, le a lot of musical cats this summer, he had  a thing of carrying one without a handle, but a zip complete with lock and key.
'Take it easy, Ronald. Put it all in a song.'
He stared at me. 'You've got an idea, there, you know,' he said. 'What rhymes with pieces of silver?'
I racked my brains, but had to admit I couldn't help him.
'This place is bad  enough,' Ron  said, waving  his  briefcase round
the musical establishment, 'but just imagine it if Seth Samaritan moves in.'
'You're right,' I said.
Ron glared at me behind his Gilbert Harding lenses. 'You say so,' he cried, 'but do you mean it?'
'Well, yes, I do. I mean you're right.'
'l am?'
'Well, yes, you are. I mean there's source music, isn't there, and period music, that feeds on it, and just comes and goes.'
'That's it!'
'In England, most of what you hear is period. Not much source.· 'There you go!'
 
A BS OLUTE BEGINNETIS	127
'And  that  applies  as  much  to  you  ballad-and-blues  puritans  as it
does to the jazz cats.'
This   didn't   go  down   quite  so  well.   ' Ou r   art's  authentic.' H.011
Todd said.
'It was,' I told him. ' But you don't think up enough songs of your own. Songs about the scene, I mean, about us and now. Most of your stuff is ancient English, or modern American, or weird ie minority songs from pokey corners. But what about our little fable? You're not really trying-any more than Dickie Hodfodder is.'
'What a comparison!'  cried  Ron, in high  disgust.
But  I saw I was  breaking  one of  my  golden  rules, which  is not  to argue  with  Marxist  kiddies,  because  they  know.  And  not  only  do they  know,  they're  not  responsible -which  is  the  exact  opposite  of what  they  think  they  are.  I  mean,  this  is  their  thing,  if  I  dig  it correctly.  You're  in  history,  yes,  because  you're  budding  here  and now, but you're outside  it, also, because  you're living  in the  Marxist future.  And  so, when  you  look around,  and  see  a  hundred  horrors, and  not   only  musical,  you're   not   responsible   for  them,   because you're beyond them  already, in the kingdom  of  K. Marx. But for me, I  must  say,  all the  horrors  I see  around  me,  especially  the  English ones, I feel responsible  for, the lot, just  as much  as for the few nice things I dig.
But, as I thought this, my eyes had strayed away from Ron, a foot
or two to that commissionaire  I spoke of, who, not being interested, I suppose, in  the  performance,  was  reading  an  evening  paper,  I don't blame him, and I caught  a  headline.  I  just  said,  'Excuse me,' and took the paper from him,  and  looked  at  a  photograph  of Suze and Henley, and ran up the steps  into  the  street.  Quite  honestly, I don't know quite what happened then, because my next quite clear recollection was batting along a highway  on my  Vespa,  which  went on for miles and miles, I don't know  where,  until  the petrol  ran   out, it stopped, and  I was  nowhere.
So I  got  off  the  vehicle,  which  I  cared  about  no  longer,  and sat
down on the verge, and watched the car lights flash by occasionally . I thought  of  an accident-yes, I did-but  not for long, because     I
. wasn't going to be rubbed out  by  a gin-soaked  motorist  returning to his bed out in the suburbs, and I thought of leaving the country, or dragging some chick  or other  to the registry  and  getting  wed  myself
 
 


 
128	COLI N    MACIN N ES
-	I  thought,  in  fact,  of  anything  but  Suze,  because  that  would  be just   too  horribly  painful   at  the  moment,  though  it  was  really  an agony  not  to  do  so-I  mean   not  think  of  her-in  fact  practically impossible:  because  even  when  Ididn't think  of  her,  I felt  the  ache of  that  Iwasn't-really  a torture. And  at that  point, the verge Iwas sitting on  turned  out not  to be  a verge,  but  a pile  of  metals  for  the roadway,   and  the  bloody   thing  collapsed   and   Islid  down  in   a cascade on to the Vespa, ove1turning it.
A car pulled up, ten feet away, and a voice inside it said, 'Are you all right?'
'No!'Iyelled back.
'You hurt?'
'Yes!'Icried out.
There was a bang and a thump and some feet came along, but I couldn't see the face above them in the glare, and the cat the feet belonged to asked me, 'You been drinking?'
'Inever drink.'
'Oh.' The cat came nearer. 'Then what's the matter?'
At  that, Ilet out a hysteric  shout, and shrieked  with  laughter  like a maniac. 'You have been drinking,' said the cat, disapprovingly.
'Well, so have you,' Isaid.
'As a matter of  fact, you're right, Ihave.'
·The cat lifted  up my  Vespa,  shook it and  said. 'You've  n m  out of
juice, that's what's your trouble. No juice left in this toy.' 'I've run out of juice all right.'
'Well then, it's simple. I'll siphon you some out.' 'You will?' Isaid, getting interested  at last.
'I've saidIwill.'
He pushed my Vespa up by the car's arse, and rummaged in th<' boot, and fished out a tube and handed it to me. 'You'd better do it,' the cat said. 'I've swallowed enough strong liquor for this evening.'
So  Isucked  away,  and  spat  out  several  mouthfuls,  and  the  dam thing  actually  worked,  exactly  as  advertised,  and  we  listened  to  it gurgling into the Vespa.
'Something's just struck me,' said the cat.
'It has?'
'I've only got a gallon or so left mysPlf. We don't want to havP to siphon it all back  again, do we.'
 
A BSOLU T E  BEG I N N ERS	129

'No,'  Isaid, making a swift bend in the tube.
'Iguess you've got enough to take you back  to civilization.' 'Thanks. Where is civilization?'  Iasked.
'You don't know where you are?' 'Not an idea.'
The cat made tst-tst noises . 'You really  should lay off  the stuff,'  he
said.  'Just  turn  about,  follow  the  cats'-eyes  half   a  mile,  and  the1 you're  on the main  road  into London.  Isuppose you _ wnt  Lnd,on?
Ihanded  back  the  tube. 'I want  the  whole  dam  city,  I said,   and
everything   contained   there.'	.	, ,
'You're very welcome to it,' said this benefactor.  I m from  Ayles-
bury, myself.'
So we shook  hands,  and patted  each  other's backs,  and  I saw him off,  then  got  on  my  Vespa  and  turned  back.  I  reached       gaage before  long,  and  got  a proper  fill,  and had  a cppa    t  a dnves _all­ night caff , and resumed my journey  into the capital, hke R. Wh1ttmg­ ton.  And  as  I  sped  along,  I  said  to  myself,  'Well-goodbye  happy youth :  from  now  on  I'm  going to  be  a  tough,  tough  nut,  and  if  she thinks  she  can  hurt  me,  she's  bloody  well  mistaken,  and  as  for  the
exhibition,  I'll  go  ahead  with  it  just  the  same,  and  make  soe loo and catch her when she falls, as she will, you  bet, and then we 11 see. Isoon  hit  familiar  sections,  and  found  myself   heading  down  to Pimlico  because-I  have  to  admit   it-I  wanted   some  miracle  to happen  and  that  squalid  old  M um  of  mine  to  grasp  what  had  hap­
pened  to her second-born,  and maybe  suggest something, or even do something, or,  at  any  rate,  say  something  about  it  all. I  reache  the area,  and  went  down  the  street  in  low, and  sure  enough,  the  hghts were  gleaming  in  her  basement,  so I parked  the Vespa,  and  stepped carefully  down,  and  took  a  glimpse  through  the  window  where,  as you  might  have  expected ,  Icould  see  her  drinking  somethin  or other  with  a  lodger.  Dad  may  have  been  right  about  the  Cypriots,
but it looked to be the same old beefo Malt to me, and honestly, though I wanted to chat Ma-I mean, in a way, I e;en felt I o"".ed it to li er to give her this opport unity-I just couldn t face opemng the whole theme up with the Malt there in attendance, even though, no doubt, she'd have got rid of him, so I went up the area steps again, an<l headed home to see if Big Jill was back now by any  chance.
Bicr  Jill  was  not-at  least,  there  was  no  light  on-but    someone
I:,
 


 
130	COL IN  M A CIN N ES
else was  there:  guess  who! It was  Edward  the  Ted  none other
 


'Ten, I sed.'
 
A BSOLU TE  BEG I N N ERS	131
 
carrying  a parcel,  and  coming  out  of  the  front  door  (hich,  as  l'v said, is always open) just  at the moment  I came in. He backed  away at first  until  he  saw  that  it was  me,  then  said, ·I  gotta  see yer,' so I invited the goon to come up into the attic and have a natter.
I turned on the subdued lighting,  of  which  I'm  rather proud (because a theatrical kid I know, who scene-shifts at the Lane, created it all for me for ten pounds, plus the costs), and I poured the brave, bad Ed a glass of lager-and-lime, that I keep there for such visitors,  and  turned  on  C.  Parker  low,  and  took  a  look  at  him. He
I was wearing his summer uniform-i.e., slept-in jeans,  four-inch prowlers, tiger vest and  blue  zip  jacket  (collar,  of  course,  turned up- he must use whalebone), with lawn-mower  hair-do  and a built­ in scowl. But something about Ed-Ted put  me  on  my  guard:  he wasn't as beat about as he  used  to be,  the snarl  was  a bit  more real and the shoulders hunched  with  a bit  more power  in  them.	'
'Fuss ov all,' said Ted, 'abaht vese platters.' 'What platters?'
'Vese there.'
He pointed at the parcel. The soil in his nails must have been inlaid.
'What are they?'
'I wanter flog thm.' 'Let's have a look.'
Much to my surprise, they were an exceedingly hip collection.
'I didn't know you had such taste,' I said to Edward. 'In fact, I didn't know you had any taste at all.'
'Eh?' he said.
'They're knocked off, I suppose.'
A crafty grin cracked  over  the monster's  countenance. 'Nachly,' he said.
'And what are you asking?' 'You name a figger.'
:1sai?, "What are you asking?"'
Ten.
'S.P. too high. I'llgive you four.' 'Errrr!'
'Keep them then, sonny.'
 
I shook my head. ' Well, that was fuss ov all,'  I  reminded  him. 'What  was second?'
Now Ed looked very sure of himself indeed, and said,  'Flikker sent me.'
'Did he. Who's Flikker?' 'You dunno?'
'That's why I asked you.'
Edward looked very contemptuous. 'If yer !iv up ear,'  he  said, 'and don no oo Flikker is, yer don no nuffln.'
'Yeah. Who is he?' 'E eads me  mob.'
'I thought you'd done with mobs. And they'd done with you. How did you work your passage back?'
'I don work.'
'How'd you join the mob?' 'They arst me.'
'On bended knee, did they? I wonder why?'
Ed stretched, then took from his zip jacket a small chopper,  such as the butcher trims the cutlets with, unwrapped a bit  of  rag  from off its blade, rubbed it, and said, 'I did a job.'
'You'll do a stretch, as well.'
'Not me. Ver push giv me cuvver.'
I got up, went over, held out my hand, and looked at Ed. He slapped the chopper down, blade sideways, quite  hard,  on  my palm. When he saw I was taking it, he tried to snatch it back.
'I'll just put it there,' I said, laying it on the floor. 'I don't like to talk during meal times.'
Ed kept some eyes on the  weapon , some on  me.  'Well,  vis  is  it,' he said. 'Flikker  wonts  ter see yer.'
'Tell him to call round.' 'Yer don tell Flikker.'
'You don't, I'm sure. Listen, Ed-Ted. If anyone wants to see me, I'm available. But I'm not being summoned by anyone except the magistrate.'
Edward arose, picked  up  his  chopper,  dangled  it,  returned  it  to his grease-gleaming jacket, and said to me, 'Ori rite. Okay. I'll tell im. An this stuff ear?'
 

 


 

132
Tll give you four.' 'Ten's wot I sec!.' "And Ised four.'
 

COLI N   M A r.I N N F.S
 
A BSOLU TE  BEGIN NERS	133
don't care a fuck about,  and land up in the  nick  for wounding. So I avoid it, if  Ican. But  on the other hand,  if  I'm  in it, I believe  quite firmly in fighting dirty-no Gentleman  Jim for me-because the only
 
As  a  matter  of  fad,  Iwas  getting  anxious  about  this  visit  and
also,  Idon't  mind  telling  you,  a  bit  scared.  Because  you  can  be  as brave  as a lion, which  Idon't  pretend  to be, but  if  fourteen  of  thesP hyenas  set  on  you,  at  night,  in  an  empty  street  (as  they  always  do, and  that's  always  about  the  number),  believe  me,  there's  absolutely nothing  you  can  do,  except  book  a  bed  in  the  general  hospital.  So best  is,  keep  out  of  their  way  if  you  possibly  can,  which  is  fairly easy,  provided  you  don't  provoke  them  (or  they  pick  on  you),  be­ cause if there is an incident, I can tell you  from experience-I mean, I've  seen  it  often  enough-no  one  will  help  you,  not  even  the  law, unless  they're  quite a number  too,  which  generally,  in  an  area such as this, they aren't, except for traffic duty.
Tll give you five,' Isaid, which was my big mistake. 'Ten.'
'Forget it, then.'
'I won't . . .' said Ed. 'Yer'll be earing frm me agen, an ver lads, and Flikker . . . An so wul vat feller e wonts aht ov it . . .'
'Who wants who out?'
'Flikker wants Cool aht ov ear.' 'Why?'
'E don av ter say why. E jus wonts im aht ov ear, an aht ov ver ole sexter. An you've  got ter tell im, tell Cool, an see e  blows.'
I stared at this English product. 'Ed,' I said, 'you can go and piss up your leg.'
Strangely enough, he smiled,  if  you  can  call that  thing  a smile.
'Ori rite,' he said, 'I'll take five.'
And now I made my second  big mistake, which  was to go over  to the cabin trunk where I keep a few odd valuables, and unlock the thing, and get out a bit of loot I had  there,  and  next  thing  Ed's hands were there inside it, and when  I  grabbed  at  them  he  pulled back and hit me on the neck, twice, quick, with his  hand  held  on the side.
Now, I hate fighting. I mean, I'm not a coward--honestly, I don't think so-but I just hate that silly mess which, apart from the risk of getting hurt yourself,  may  mean  you  Jamage  someone else you
 
object I can see in fighting, if you've  got to,  is to win  as quickly  as you  can, then  change  the subject.
So though  in great pain,  my first act, while  Ed was still jabbing  at my  neck,  was  to  grab  his  jacket  by  both  hands  so that  he  couldn't get  his  paws  back  on the chopper,  and  my  next  was  to struggle  up, while he was  still bashing  at my face,  and jump  on his  feet  with  all my nine-stone-something,  and then kick him hard as Icould on both his  shins, just  as  Ifelt  some teeth  rattling  and  blood  flowing  in  my eyes. He bent  down, he had to, and  Ilet go his jacket,  and grabbed the lime bottle,  and cracked  it on Edward's skull as heavy as Iknew how,  and he wobbled  and melted  and fell over, where Ikicked  him in the stomach, just to make perfectly sure.
'You wasted mess of a treacherous bastard!' Iexclaimed.
Ed lay there moaning. Igot out his chopper, staggered over to the window,   and  flung  it  into  the  Napoli   night,   then  turned  up  C. Parker,  on  account  of  the  neighbours  hearing  what  they  shouldn't and   wiped   some   of   the   blood   off   with   a  sheet,   and  the   door opened, and there was Mr Cool.
'Hi,' Cool said. 'I heard some turmoil.' I pointed  at Ed-Ted. 'That's it,' I said.
Cool walked across and looked at him. 'Oh, that one,' he said. 'Excuse me not arriving earlier.'
'Better late than never,' I said. 'You can help me  dispose  of the body.'
Cool looked  me over. 'You'd better  go in the bathroom,' he   said.
'I'll see him off.' And he took hold of the neck of Edward's jacket with two long, lean, very solid hands, and started  dragging him across the floor, and out the door, and I could hear them bumping down the stairway like the removal  men  shifting the grand  piano for you.
In the bathroom, I put myself together, and found all  was well, except that I felt terrible, and I went back to my room, and took the top record from Ed's packet out  of  its sleeve,  and  put  it on, and  it was the MJQ  playing  Concorde, very smooth  and comforting.
Cool re-appeard-, nodded  at  the  m usic,  said,  'Nice,'  and  asked  if
 


 

134	COL IN   MACIN NES
he could wash, and I went with him in the bathroom.  'Where'd    you
 


'Little groups . . .'
 
A BSOLUTE  BEG IN NERS	135
 
stow Ed?'Iasked.
'In the area. Next door. Behind the dustbins.' 'I do hope he's not dead, or dying.'
'Idon't  think  so,'  said  Cool,  drying  his  long  hands.  'He'll  d,ie another  day,' and he gave me a not very pleasant  smile. As we went back in the room, Itold him what Ed had been  on about during his kindly visit.
'Wilf told me the same,' he said, '-my brother.' 'He's with that lot?'
'He'd like to be, but they won't have him, on account of me.' 'And this Flikker,'   asked Cool. 'You know him?'
'Iknow his appearance . . .' 'Tough number, is he?'
'Well, there's four hundred teenagers, they say, up here,  who he can beckon.'
'Four hundred? Don't kid me, Cool.' 'Believe me. Four hundred or so.' 'And teenagers?'
'Well, Teds, semi-Teds . . . you know . . . local hooligans . . .'
I wish you could hear the spite Cool put into  that  last word! 'Well, what you think about all this?' I asked him.
Cool lit a fag. 'Something's happening,' he said. 'You mean now?'
'Someting's cooking . . . Excuse me, but you wouldn't notice, son, not being coloured . . .'
'Well, tell me: what?' Because shit! I didn't want to believe this whole thing at all.
'For instance: they've taken to running us down with cars. And motor-bikes.'
'Accidents. Drunks. You sure?'
'It's happened so often. It's deliberate. You  have  to  skip  fast when you see them coming.'
'What else, Cool?'
'Well, there's this one. They stop you and  ask you  for  cigarettes. If you offer them, they take the whole pack, and grin. If you don't, they take a smack at you, and run.'
"'They." How many "they"?'
 
'This thing has happened to you?'
' Yes. Also this. Few days ago, down by the tube station, they topped  me  and  said,  "Which  side  you  want  your  hair  parted?'"
'And you said what?' 'Nothing.'
'You were alone?'
'Two of us. Eight or nine of them.' 'What then?'
'They said, "We hate you".' 'You answered?'
'No. Then they said, "Get back to your own country".' 'But this is your country, Cool.'
'You think so?'
'By Christ, Ido!Itell you, man, yes, I bloody well do, it isl '
'That's whatItold them.' 'So you answered?'
'When they said that, I did, yes.' 'What happened  then?'
'They said I was a mongrel. So my friend said, "When  your mother wants a good f--k, she doesn't bother about  your father­ she comes to me.'' '
'How'd they like that?'
'I don't know . Because when he said that, my friend also pulled his flick on them, and told them to come on.'
'And they did?'
'No, they didn't. But that time, they were only eight or nine.'
A look had come into Cool's eyes, as he stared at me, just like the look he must have given those Teds. 'Don't glare at me like that man,' I cried. Tm on your side.'
'You are?'
'Yes.'
'That's nice of you,' said Cool, but I saw he didn't mean it, or believe me.
I  turned  off  the MJQ.  'So what's  going to happen  next?'  I  asked
him.
'I don't  know,  boy.  I wish  I could  tell you,  but  I can't. All  I do
know, is this. Up  till  now, it's been  white Teds against whites,    all
 


 
136	COLI N     MACIN NES
their baby gangs. If they start on coloured, there's only a few thousand of us in this area, but I don't think you'll see there's many cowards.'
I couldn't take all this nightmare. I cried out,  'Cool,  this  is Lon­ don, not some hick city in the provinces! This is London, man,  .a capital, a great big city where every kind  of  race  has  lived  ever since  the Romans!'
Cool said, 'Oh, yeah. I believe you.' 'They'd never allow it!' I exclaimed. 'Who wouldn't?'
'The adults! The men! The women! All the authorities! Law and order is the one great English thing!'
Here Cool made no reply. I took his shoulder. 'And Cool,' I said. 'You-you're one of us. You're not a Spade, exactly . . .'
He took off my hand. 'If it comes to any trouble,' he said, 'I am. And the reason I am is that they've never questioned me, never refused me, always accepted -me-you understand? Even though I am part white? But your people . . . No. The part of me that belongs to you, belongs to them.'
And after he said that, he went out.
So what with all this, I spent an evil  night:  sometimes waking with pains and itches, and the red-purple glow hanging in the sky outside the window, sometimes dreaming those dreams you can't remember, except they're horrible, sometimes  lying  thinking,  and not sure if it was me or someone else . . . But  when  I  did wake, round about mid-day, I knew there were two things, anyway, that I must do: number one, call Dr A. R. Franklyn, on the pretext of tending my wounds, but actually to fix that rendezvous  with  Dad, and number two, to track down Wiz: because  about  all that  Cool had told me, the only person who  would  really  know-and  who could match his danger, if he wanted to, with Flikker or anybody else-was Wizard. Also, I wanted to see the boy  again.
When I went out, to rent a call-box, the sun was  busy  at it, and the day was calm. But whether it was what I'd heard, or just that  I was weary, there did seem a silence  in the air; together with  a  sort of movement: I mean, as if  the  air was shifting not  by  the  wind, but by itself, to and fro, then pausing. On the steps, after a while to
take this  in  and wonder,  I called  down  to Jill a moment  to ask  if she
 
A BSOL UTE  BEG I N N E RS	137
knew Wiz's number, then checked in the area next door to see if Ed was there (he wasn't), and set off up the street to where the phones are. The glass of one box, which lord knows, is tough as iron, had been splintered in most squares of it, and in the other, the moutli­ and-ear thing had been ripped out at  the roots.  So I went  back  in the cracked one, and dialled  Harley  street.
I got the secretary-nurse, who said she remembered me, and how was I, and that Dr F. was on his holidays, down there in Roma, at a congress, but back in a week, she thought, and would I call again? Meanwhile, was there anything? My head seemed just  a chemi6t's job to me, so I said no, best regards to the doctor, and best to  her, and thank you, I'd try another time. Then I got on the line to Wiz .
Now, as a matter of fact, I was a bit  anxious  about  this call. In the first place, would Wiz like it? And in the second . . . well, I'd never exactly belled anyone in that kind of business before, and  who would  I get first on  the  line?  The  boy?  The  girl?  The maid?  One of
the clients? So as bzm-bzm went the bell, I practised my possible openings. But I needn't have bothered, it was Wiz, he said Big Jill
had told him I'd be calling,  and when  was  I coming round?  He gave me the address, and said to hit the bell marked 'Canine  Perfec­ tionist' up on top. So I buzzed  off  down there at once, and did    that.
Another surprise was that, in addition to Wiz himself, there was Wiz's woman, who somehow I expected would be out  of sight-I mean not receiving me so socially, like someone's auntie. She looked very young to me, and, as they say, 'respectable', in fact, if I'd seen her at the local whist drive (supposing I'd been there), I doubt if I'd have rumbled anything. The only point was, she had a way  of looking at you as if you were a possibly valuable product-I mean a t:ake of soap, or leg of chicken, or something of that description. I suppose, too, I'd half expected to find all sorts of orgies going on­ judges and bishops having a ball on voluptuous divans-but in  fact the whole set-up was very ordinary-even a little prim and dainty or, as Ron Todd would say, boogewah.
While Wiz's woman was getting us a cuppa, and some Viennese gattos, I told him of Ed and Cool and Flikker  and the whole  scene up in Napoli. 'There seems to be something wrong up there,' I said.
'An what you want me to do?' Wiz said, not very nicely. 'I don't know, Wiz. Maybe come up and have a look.'
 


 
138	COLIN  MACIN NES
'Why, kiddo? In this profession, you mustn't get mixed in  any­ thing except you  must.'
'No, I suppose not.'
'What you worrying about, anyway, boy? You're not a colour problem . . .'
I saw I wasn't getting my thing across to Wiz at all. There he sat, curled like a cheetah, dressed up in casuals that cost far more than usuals, smiling and smirking and fucking pleased  with  himself,  I dare say.
'It's just, Wiz,' I said, trying a 6nal bash, 'that I thought  what  I told you would disgust you, too.'
'Well,' he said, 'as a matter of fact, it does. It does, boy, it does­ all these mugs' activities disgust me: hitting without warning, for example! The games people play!'
I apologized for that, and wanted to say he'd played a few,  and still was, if it came to that, but you have to remember, with the Wizard, that the kid, somewhere there inside, is so very young. Really, in many ways, he's just a short-pant product.
He'd got up, to play some music that he'd captured on his tape­ recorder. 'I know this Flikker  kid,' he said, pressing button  A, or  B.
'Oh? Come on then, Wizard. Tell.'
He did. The Wiz, it turned out, and Flikker, were  both  old  boys of an ecclesiastical baby-farm in Wandsworth, down by the common there-which was news to me about the Wizard, as well as about the Ted. According to Wiz, the infant  Flikker  had  been  noted for his meek and mild behaviour, and much scorned for such by the other young lost-property toughies, until the day came when, at the age of eleven, he'd drowned a junior in the Wandie river, by launch­ ing the nipper in an oil drum and dropping rocks in it till it sub­ merged . Henceforth, the other kittens at the lost cats' home kept Flikker somewhat at a distance, which, according to Wiz's memory, surprised and pained young Flikker, who, it seemed, had no notion whatever he's done something out of the ordinary  at all. Wiz  told the tale as I've just done, for giggles, but even he didn't seem  to think it all that laughable, I could see.
And then? I asked. Then, said the Wiz, the  child  had  been sent away to all the delinquent cages that they have for the various age­ groups, working  his  way  upward  year by year,  until  now,  at the age
 
A BSOLUTE  BEG IN NERS	139
of seventeen  or so, he was as highly trained  in anti-social conduct as any  kiddo  in  the  kingdom,  and  the  law  were  only  waiting  for  his next  major  operation  to  put  him  away  for  a  really  adult  stretch. Heaven  help,  said, Wiz,  the  screws wherever  they  sent him  to, be­ cause  unless  they  beat  him  up  and  turned  him  mad,  which  they probably  would  do,  the  kid  would  certainly  do  one  of  them,  the trouble  being,  so  it  seemed,  that  the  boy  wasn't  so  much  exactly bad,  as  having  no  grasp  at  all  of  what  being  bad  really  meant. Meantime,  his  chief   exploit,  since  his  last  home  leave  from  the ministry,  had  been  to  wreck  the  Classic  cinema  in  the     adbroke basin   and   with  some  of  his  four  hundred,  drop  the  law s  coach­ and-f   ur  ito  a  bomb  site,  while  others  engaged  the  cowboys  in pitched  battle with milk bottles  and dustbin  lids. 'In fact,' Wiz con­ cluded, 'the boy should be put to sleep.'
'No one should,' I said. 'Not even you.'
At  that  point  the  phone  bell  rang,  and  Wiz's  woman  reappeared, and  took  over  the  captain's  bridge  from  Wiz  jus t  for  the  moment very  obviously, because  this  was business  coming  up.  If you'd  hap­ pened  to  hear  her  conversation,  over  crossed  lines-I  mean,  only her  end  of  it-it would  have  sounded  completely  ordinary,  because of  the  careful way  she chose her  words, but  if you  knew  the whole picture  as  we  did, you  could  see  how  her  spiel  all  dovetailed  with the  arrangements  she was making  with  the randy  cat  at the far end of  the blower.  And  you  couldn't  help  wondering, from  her  answers, who this character  might be-and whether  he had any notion  of  the actual  scene  at  the  receiving  end,  and  the  matter -of-fact  way  his glamorous date was being organized for him, poor silly fucker.
After  that   Wiz's  woman  looked  at  us  politely ,  and  didn't say
anything, bu; after a while Wiz got up, as if   hat was    ht he'd been planning  to  do  now  for  some  time,  and  said  why  did t  he  an  I take  a  little  stroll?  and  went  out  with  me  without  saymg  anythmg to his woman, who didn't say anything to him.
There  in  the  air,  after  a  bit  of  silence,  we  turned  into  a  private
square, that Wiz seemed to have the key to--as a matter of fact, within sight of the department store where I mentioned earlier how we used to go together-and we sat down on two metal chairs,  there in the late afternoon  sun, and Wiz said, 'Boy, it's a drag: I tell   you, if s a drag. As soon as I've made a bit of loot, I'm cutting out.'
 


 
140
'Will she let you?'
'Let me?'
'She seems to like you.'
 

COLIN  MACIN NES
 
ABSOLUTE  BEG IN N E R S	14 1
suitable vehicle for Hoplite, but the kid  was such  a telly  natural that they'd have to place him somewhere, which they were going to do this  evening  in  a magazine  series  called, Junction!, where they
 
'Oh, she likes me all right!' He laughed-quite horrible. 'But I'm turning her loose as soon as I've got just that much I need.'
'And what'll you do with that just that much?'
He looked at me. 'Kid, I dunno,' he said. 'Maybe travel. Or start some business. Something, anyway.'
He aimed a pebble at a pigeon.
'Unless you get knocked off first,' I couldn't help saying.
He gave me a shove. 'Not likely, boy, honest, it's not likely. Your bird on the streets-yes, it's dodgy. But call-girl  business-it's  really not so easy for them to prove.'
'There's a first time for everything, they say.' 'Oh, sure they do.'
He aimed another pebble, and scored a bull.
I said, 'You don't mind if I ask you a question, Wizard?' 'Shoot, man.'
'Your chick's had, let's say, x men . The day's work is over, and you come home to sleep. How do you feel about it?'
'About what?'
'The x men she's just had.'
Wiz looked at me: I swear I really wanted to do something for the boy that moment-give him a thousand pounds and see him off to some lovely south-sea island, where he could have a glorious, care­ free ball. 'I don't feel about it,' he said.
'No?'
'No. Because I don't think about it. I don't let myself-see.'
ome kids were_ running to and fro, and the flowers and every­ thmg were bloommg, and the birds strutting-even the one he'd scored on-and I couldn't bear it. 'See you, Wiz,' I said. 'Come up and visit me.' He didn't answer, but when I turned back at the gate to look at him, he waved.
By nw it wa the evening, and I wondered whether to keep my date with ophte. Frankly, I was quite exhausted,  and not  only that, I wasn t sure I really wanted to see Hop display himself in front of the TV cameras to the nation . The fact was, you see, that Call-me-Cobber had decided the Lorn Lover thing wasn't quite the
 
threw unexpected and unsuitable pairs and groups together in the studio, to see what happened .
But after a quick bite at a Nosh , and two strong black coffees, I felt up to the ordeal, and headed it out to the studios in a taxi. I got past the commissionaires and women at desks with cobra glasses by means I've always found effective: which is, walk firmly, boldly in as if anyone who doesn't know what your business is just doesn't know his own (this shames them), go smartly up the stairs, or take a lift and press some button, then knock at any door whatever, say you're lost, and you'll find a pretty secretary who'll put you on the right track, and even show it to you personally.
The one I fell on took me along to Call-me-Cobber's office, where the  Aussie  looked  just  a bit  surprised to see me,  but not  much,  be­ cause  already  he  had  a  bunch  of  strange  characters on  his  hands. There was  Fabulous,  of  course, who ran  up  and hugged me, which was embarrassing, and four others who, I learned from the secretary, were  all  going to  be  separately  rehearsed  from  five  quite  different characters  who  were  hidden  somewhere  else  inside  the  building, and then be put together  at the actual performance, so that we'd see Hoplite with  a rear-Admiral,  an Asian  gooroo with  a Scottish  steak­ house chef, an undischarged  bankrupt and a cat from Carey street, a lady milliner and a male milliner  (that was a cute one, I considered), and finally, to wind the thing up before the commercials came on to bring relief , a milk delivery roundsman and an actual cow.
While our little lot were having gins-and-oranges, and triangular sandwiches with grass in them, of which I partook too, the Cobber one was busy with a stack of telephones, like the captain of a jet before his instrument panel, bringing the craft in for a tricky land­ ing. I don't know what it is that comes over so many numbers when they use the blower: it must give them a power thing, like driving some tatty beat-up motor also seems to, because they take liberties on the blower they never would to anyone face to face. If they're calling out, they tell their secretary to catch all sorts of cats, and keep them waiting at the far end, like fish on hooks, until they're kindly ready themselves to say their little piece of nonsense. And   if
 


 
142	COLIN    MACIN N ES
they're being called themselves, they'll never say, excuse me, won't you,. to whoever's in_ the room, or tell the cat who's buzzing them they 11 call back a httle later, even if the number sitting in their office has something more important to tell them than the mug on the blower has. And when the dam thing rings, in any household, everyone flies to it, as if Winston Churchill's at the other end, or M. Monro, or someone, instead of the grocer about the unpaid bill or, more likely,  a wrng number.  We're  all  too  much  set  on gadgets, d let the dam thmgs rule us, and that's why, back home at  Napoli,
I ve,always refused to have the blower in, but using Big Jill's or, if I don t want her to hear the message, then the public.
Well, all was rare confusion, with Call-me-Cobber  using six green phones  at once, and secretaries  and junior  male products  explaining the  forthcoming  scene  to  the  dazed  performers,  when  in  came  a fmale  ell   queen in a   ark blue suit with bits of  clean, white, frilly lmen stickmg out at various neat and vital points, and a big, slightly wrinkled  brow,  and  a too-powdered  face  and  thin  lips  and  lots  of schoolteacher's  calm,  and  a  really  dreadful  smile   who  evidently intended  to straighten  things  out, and  put us  all  at 'ease, and  some­ body  said,  just  as  you  might  say  here was  Lady  Godiva,  that  this was Miss Cynthia Eve, c.B.E.
And while Cynthia Eve spread calm about, giving everyone ner­ vous breakdowns, I had a natter with the Hoplite on an air sofa that let out a fart each time you sat on it, or even moved. 'You look glorious, Hop,' I said. 'You're going to kill them.'
'But an admiral! Baby, I shall faint!'
'You don't know your own strength, Hoplite. Just fire a few salvoes of broadsides at him.'
The Hoplite mopped his face, which was  painted  the  colour of old orange peel.
'And  the  Nebraska  kid,'  I  said.  'Will  he  be  viewing?  Or  is he
around here somewhere?'
The Hoplite gripped my arm. 'Oh, no!' he cried. 'Didn't I tell you sweetie? It's all over between he and me!'	'
'Yes? It is? My heavens?'
, 'Over and done with!' cried the Fabulous with great  emphasis. From the moment I saw him in a hat.'
'A hat, did you say?'
 
A BSOL U TE  BEG IN NE RS	143
'Yes, a hat. Imagine it! Baby, he wore  a  hat. The whole  thing faded instantly. I'm heartbroken.'	,
But now the sad lad, and his group of weirdie colleagues, were    '
hustled  out  for  their  rehearsal,  and  I  went  along  with  the  other stage-door  gum-shoes  to  a  viewing  room,  where  we  could  observe the act when  it finally  came on. I thought  about  the  dear old telly, and what  an education  it has been  to one and  all. I mean, until  the TV  thing got swinging, all we  uncultured  cats knew next to nothing about art, and fashion, and archaeology,  and long-haired music, and all  those  sorts  of  thing,  because  steam  radio  never  made  them  all seem  real,  and  as  for  paper  talk,  well,  no  one  in  their  senses  ever believes  that. But  now,  we'd seen  all these  things,  and  the  experts and professors, and were digging their secrets and their complicated language,  and  having  a  sort  of  non-university  education.  The only catch-and,  of  course,  there  always  is  one-is  that,  when  they  do put on a programme  about something I really know about-which I admit is little, but I mean jazz,  or teenagers, or juvenile  delinquency
-	the whole dam things seems utterly unreal. Cooked up in a hurry, and made to sound simpler than it is. Those programmes about kiddos, for example! Boyl I dare say they send the tax-payers, who think the veil's being lifted on the teenage orgies, but honestly, for anyone who knows the actual scene, they're crap. And maybe, in the things we don't know about, like all that art and culture, it's the
same, but I can't judge.
Which makes me admit, it's all very well sneering at universities, and students with those awful scarves and flat-heeled shoes, but really and truly, it would be wonderful to have a bit of kosher education: I mean, to know what's up there in  the  sky:  just up above you, like the blue over the umbrella, and find out whatever's phoney about our culture, and anything in it that may be  glorious and real. But for that, you have to be caught young and study,  and it's a hard task, believe me, to try to find the truth about it on  your Pat Malone, because so many are anxious to mislead you, and you don't know exactly where to turn.
Well,  excitement  mounted,  and  now  came  the Junction! thing.
First came some trains rushing at each other, then some racing cars doing likewise, and then some aircraft landing on the tarmac, and a voice  bellowed   'Junction!'   in  an  echo-chamber,   and  we  found
 


 
144	COLIN    MACIN NES
ourselves face to face with Call-me-Cobber. Believe me, the number was transformed! If you didn't know what an imbecile  he  was, you'd take him for a man of destiny, because he frowned and glared and spoke up so dam honest and convincing, just like W. Graham, and that nasal Aussie accent gave the exact tone of  sincerity.  He said life was a junction: the junction, he said, of composite opposites (he liked that group, and riffed it several times). From the shock of ideas, he told us, in this day and age, the light would shine! And the next thing we saw was the Hoplite with a cheery old geezer who'd obviously had four or five too many.
The Hop was terrific: boy! if they don't sign that cat up for  a series, they're no talent-spotters. He hogged the camera-in fact, the dam thing had to keep chasing him about the studio-and spoke up like he was King Henry V in a Shakespearean performance. He told us that what he believed in was the flowering of the human per­ sonality, such as his own, and how could a personality flower in the boiler-room of a destroyer?
At  this  point,  Call-me-Cobber   interrupted   him-though  he  found it darn difficult, and for a while you couldn't tell who was saying what-and he brought in the old rear-Admiral. The ideas,  as  you11 have dug, was that this nautical cat should sail in with guns blazing, fling all his grappling-irons on the Hoplite, explode his powder magazine, and keel-haul him before  making  him  walk  the  plank. But all the time that Fabulous had  been  speaking,  the  old  boy  had been jerking his bald head like a bobbin, and punching himself  on both his knees, and when he spoke up, it seemed he  couldn't  have agreed more with all that Fabulous had said. He told us the navy wasn't what it used  to  be,  by  God,  no!  In his  day,  it  seemed,  you ate salt fish for breakfast, and  shaved  in  Nelson's  blood.  What  the fleet needed badly, he told the viewers, and the Board of Admiralty too, was a depth-charge let off under all their bottoms, and he was very glad to hear Hoplite's constructive criticisms, and would wel­ come him aboard any ship that he commanded. Hop said that was okay by him, except for the uniform which was too much like an old-style musical, and couldn't the admiral do something about streamlining it a bit, and getting pink porn-porns for bell-bottomed­ Jack like those French matelots have got. They had  a  bit  of  an argument   over   that,   with   the  admiral   quoting   Trafalgar   and the
 
A BSOL U TE  BF.G I N N EJ\ S	145
Nile and something  I didn't  catch  about Coburg harpoons,  I think it was, and all this while Call-me-Cobber was trying to chip in, but when he did, they both rammed him immediately, the admiral bellowing 'Avast!', and the Hoplite saying, 'Keep out of this, land­ lubber,' till eventually they had to fade the couple out, and move on to the Asian gooroo and the Scotch steak-house  products,  though you could still hear Hoplite and the  old admiral  having  a private ball somewhere off scene in the background.
Well, after all this, the whole circus (except for the cow) gathered in a reception room without any air  or  windows,  and  there was more booze on the house, and Cynthia Eve, c.a.E.,  clapped  her hands together, and addressed us. The effort had been fine, she said. Magnificent, she told us. The viewers were buzzing in with com­ plaints and congratulations, and she looked forward to seeing the viewing figures, and some of us must certainly come again (and she gave old Hop an eerie, dazzling smile). It wasn't often, she went on, she used the word 'magnificent': if things just  ticked  over, all she said was, 'Thanks so much for coming,'  but  this  time-well,  she'd say it again-the only word that fitted was  'magnificent'.
But the ghost at the wedding was old Call-me-Cobber.  Maybe  the cat was just ti.red out, which was understandable, but he seemed to be thoroughly wrought down, and I felt sorry for him,  and wished the ex-Deb-of-Last-Year was there so he could weep upon her shoulder. Well, come to think of it, it must be sad to be a Call-me­ Cobber: because without that little  television  box,  you're  nobody; and  with  it, you're  a king  in our  society-a television personality.
Out on the road, though, Hoplite was  a  bit  sad,  too:  the  boy's a born a1tist, I'm convinced, and this taste of the telly magic had disturbed him. There was also his emotional upset, and he said, 'By the way, although it's all over with Nebraska, he's asked me to visit him at his base, and in spite of all my pangs, I just can't resist the op­ portunity . Will  you  come too?  I'd  love to  see  the  occupation  army.'
'It'll be air personnel,' I said. 'The army's left.'
'Well, tailored uniforms, and  gorgeous  work  clothes,  like  their films of prisons . You're not tempted?'
I told him okay, but I had to leave him just  for now, because if    I
didn't, I'd have to bed down there and then upon the pavement. Because the fact was, I was spent.
 







I N  A U G UST
 




FOR   our  trip  up  the  river,  Dad  and  I  decided  that  we'd  settle  for die  bit  in  between  Windsor  castle  and  a  place  called  M arlow.  We chose the shorter  run because we found that was about all we could manage  what   with  travelling  to  and  fro  from  London,  and   also because   Dael's  health   was   certainly  far  from   brillian t-an d   also because   I'd  discovered   (but  this  was   a  secret   that  I  kept  from Dad)  that  Suze and  Henley  had  a  house  down  by  the  Thames  at  a village  by  the  name  of  Cookham,  and  though  I'd  no  intention  of dropping  in  for  tea   and  buttered   scones,  I  certainly  wanted   to have  a look  at the place,  as our  pleasure  boat  sailed  by,  if  that  was possible.
There  we  were,  then,  up  in  the  front  seat,  and  passing  under Windsor  bridge.  I  don't  know  if  you've  ever  been  in  a  Tunnel  of Love-I  mean  in  one  of  those  boats  that  wind  along  it  in  at  the amusement  parks-but  if  you  have, you'll  know  the  whole  point  is to get in that front seat, right up in the prow, because  if you  do, you have the sensation  as you  glide along, that you're just  hanging there over  the  water:  no  boat,  just  you  and  the  surroundings.  Well,  this was the same (except, of  course, that  it was light, not  dark-in fact, a  glorious  August  day),  the  water  sparkling  so  that  I  had  on  my Polaroids,  the  diesel  chugging,  and  old  Dad  there,  with  his  open­ neck shirt and sandals, and his mackintosh  in a roll (trust Dad !), and puffing  away  like  an  engine  at  his  briar.  Up  there  behind  us,  was the  enormous  castle,  just  as  you  see  it  on  the  cinema  screen  when they  play  'the  Queen'  and  everyone  hustles  out,  and  there  out  in front  of  us  were  fields  and trees  and  cows  and  things  and  sunlight, and  a huge big sky filled  with  acres  of  fresh  air, and  I thought,  my heavens!  if  this  is  the  country,  why  haven't  I  shaken  hands  with  it before-it's glorious!
In fact, the only dark cloud on the horizon, was  Dad  himself.  It's like this. By means of nagging and prodding and persuading, I'd managed to get him inside Dr A. R. Franklyn's consulting-room in Harley street. Honest, it was like getting a hip cat into a symphony concert, but I succeeded. While I waited outside, reading eighteen magazines from co:ver to cover, Dr F. gave my Dael a thorough go­ over.   But   all  he  would   tell   us   was   that  he  must   get   Dad into
149
 


 
150	COL I N  M A CI N N ES
hospital for a proper examination, which he couldn't do there in Harley street even if he'd wanted to, but  Dad  turned  this down point blank, and said he wouldn't go into hospital unless they'd tell him  what  was  the matter-which,  as I tried  to explain  to him   (but
·	it was like talking to a wall), was exactly what they wanted to find out, if only he'd only go inside there for a day or two. But Dad said once they get you in hospital, you're half dead already, and he wouldn't.
Well, there it was. I tried to forget it, on this sunny summer day, but there it was.
At this point, we went round a great U-bend, honking our horn like a truck in the Mile End road, and round in the other direction came two hundred or so little boats-I swear I don't exaggerate­ each with one kiddo in them, sitting the wrong way round, and rowing like lunatics: a club, it must have been, of athletic juniors, each in white vest and pants and brown legs and arms and a red neck-it was cyclists they made me think of, weaving their way at speed through the city traffic-and we, of course, had to slow down almost to zero as they shot by both sides of us in their dozens. And I got up and cheered, and even old Dad did. Wonderful kiddos on that hot-pot cracking day, racing downstream as if only the salt sea would stop them!
And as we went on, I was really astonished at all the different kinds of boats  they had  on this old river!  Boy! there's a great  life on this Thames you'd never imagine, if you only saw it down in the city among the cargo ships and barges. Moored beside the stream there were square things like caravans, with proper chimneys  and cats emptying slops over the side, and out in the fairway there were powered craft-some of them, believe  me, you  could  have sailed in to South America-and occasionally we met a real old-timer, with a funnel and steam engine, like the Mississippi things they show you on the LP sleeves. And a big surprise was that there were so many sailing boats: I mean, how did they do their criss-cross performance, like Saturday night drunks, in a river as narrow  as  old  father Thames is up there? And canoes, of course, and eskimo boats with one oar made of two (I hope you dig), and even the craziest  number of them all-a fiat one like a big cardboard box the same size each end, where the chick sits on cushions in the front part, with a  brolly,
 
A BSOLUTE  BEG I N N E R S	151
and her stud heaves the thing along with a hop pole, just like gondolas. And the biggest surprise of all, when we got a bit further up the river, was one really large sailing boat lying there in a sort of parking lot, which, according to Dad, must have been brought up there in bits and re-assembled-anyway,  I  can't  tell  you how peculiar it was to see this big ocean boat sitting there right in the middle of the English countryside.
Surprises? Believe me, there were plenty. Did you know  those river cats drive their boats on the wrong side of the water? I mean, no keep left nonsense at all for them? And dig this one. Did you know, when you go up stream-I do hope I make this plain-you go up hill, and so you have to use a kind of staircase, which is called locks? This is the spiel. You form up in a queue, just like at the Odeon, then, when it's your tum, sail in at one end, into a sort of square concrete well, and they shut two big doors behind you, as if you were going away inside the nick, and there you  are, like  pussy at the bottom of the drain. Then the lock-keeper product-with a peaked cap, and an Albert watch-chain, and rubber boots-throws some switches or other, and the water gushes in, and you'd hardly credit it, but you start going up yourself! I mean rising like in a commercial lift. And when you've got up there, you find to your amazement that the river on the far side is way up there too: i.e., at the same level as you're at yourself now in the well thing. And the lock-keeper opens two more doors, by pushing against great wooden arms they have with his arse-and a lot of kidlets helping  him to  do so, or maybe hindering-and you get your reiease papers, and your civvy clothes back and your fare money, and see! you're out in. the stream again away to freedom, except that now you're that much higher up! Boy! I certainly dig those locks! And most of them had little gardens, like in St. James's, and tea chalets, and river cats and onlookers all jigging around and shouting, and having a great, noisy, lazy, watery ball!
'What about a pint?' said Dad, who the sight  of  all  this water must have been making thirsty.
'Why not? Come on, I'llbuy.'
'You flush these days?' Dad asked, as we made our way past the excursionists, and the skipper at his tiller. and the technical kiddo who helped him by sitting on the rail.
 

 

 
152	COLIN    M ACIN N ES
'I've just had a sub,' I answered, as we cracked our heads  011  the low door leading down into the  saloon.
'For doing what?' he asked me, when I'd got the wallop and the Coke.
It's weird, isn't it, how your elders are always so suspicious  when they hear that you've made money! They just can't credit that little junior  has grown  up a bit,  and turned some honest coin.
'If you listen, Dad, I'll explain,' I said. But it was hard to co11- centrate, because through the  portholes  just  beside  our  faces  we were exactly at the  water  level,  and  you  found  yourself  unable not to watch, just  like the telly.
'I'm listening,' Dad said.
I told him how a character I knew called V. Partners,  who's prominent in the advertising industry, had said he's sponsor an exhibition of my photos if I'd agree he take the best of them to publicize a skin lotion he was marketing, called Tingle-tangle, which was targeted at the teenage market, and that he'cl given me an advance on it of two times  twenty-five.
'That's not much,' said Dad-very greatly to my surprise. 'You don't think so?'
'It's not all you could have . . .'
'You mean I should have asked more?'
'Not that exactly, no. Did you sign anything?'
'Ihad to.'
'You're a bloody fool, son.  Also,'  Dad  added,  ' he  is,  because you're  a minor.'
Well!
'Listen, Dad,' I said, quite a bit vexed, 'I've  11ot  got your experience, but one thing I'm not, please, is a   fool.'
'Apologies,' said Dad. 'Apologies accepted.'
But  I  wasn't  pleased-no,  not  at  all-the  more  so  as  I  thought Dad  might  probably  be  right.  Vendice  was  very  nice-and  at  any rate  he'd  listened  to  me,  and  not  laughed-but  of  course  he  was  in business  for  commercial  purposes.  I  thought:  I  must  get  to  know  a lawyer .
'What time we get there?' Dad asked.
'Marlow? You thinking of that already? About   six.'
 
A BSOLUTE  BF.GINNF.R S	153
·We might stay down there for tea.'
·U you  want  to, Dad, but  I'd  like to get back  to the smoke, if you don't    ind, because  Iwant to take in a concert, second house.'
'That jazz?'
'Yeah. That jazz.'	.
'Oh, all right. Where we have mid-day grub?'
Ithought  quick.  'Well,'  Isaid,  'we  could  have  it  here  on  the Queen  Mary,  or  we  could  stop off  at  one  of  the  little  villages,  and catch the next boat on.'
'Our tickets let us?'
'Oh, certainly. I've checked.'
·Well, we'll see,' he said. 'Okay.'
That brought back thoughts of Suze. And much as I love old Dad, taking him all in all, I couldn't but wish that, at that very  moment, he wasn't there, but she. Glory! how fabulous it'd be to make this river trip with Crepe Suzette! And why in creation didn't I think  of it, back in the earlier days?
Wow!  Ireally  had   a  shock!  Because  a  face-a  human   face­ flashed  by  a  porthole,  just   outside.  But  then  Isaw  what  it  was, which  was  a bunch  of  bathers  knocking  themselves  out  in  tlie  sur­ rounding  drink,  and  Dad  and  I went  upstairs  to  get  a  closer  dekko. There  they  were-scores  of  them-diving  off  the  bank,  thrashing about in the river, and making the skipper swear at them by coming too  near  to  his  transatlantic.  Yelling  and  splashing  or,  if  they  had any sense,  roasting  their  torsos  up  there  on the  green,  or just  stand­ ing  in  plastic  poses,  watching . 'Good  luck  to  you!'  Ishouted  at  an Olympic  number  who'cl flogged  it  across  the  water  in  front  of  the ship's bows. 'Help! but I'd like to join  them,' I told Dad.
After this we passed a quieter bit, with  big  houses  with their front lawns on the river, and sometimes quite lonely, with only an angler or two sitting like they were  statues, and swans coming  out to hiss at us, j !J.ie- lli_gators h_en the paddle.steamer sails up th Amazon, or the Zambesi, or wherever it is, to gnash at the ex­ plorers. As we passed tall banks of rushes, they seemed to bow to us, because thev sank several feet, then rose again when we'cl gone by. And someti;nes hills popped up unexpectedly- and what was even more  peculiar,  popped  up  again  (I mean  the  same hills)  in some
 


 
154	COLIN   MA CI N N ES
quite different location, because we'd gone round several mile-long bends. There were little bridges we could only just get under, like in corny films about baronial  Scotland, and beside  each  of  the   locks,
were  weirs  with  notices  saying  'Danger',  and  roaring  noises like
Niagara, or almost. In fact, the whole darn scene was as good as Cinerama in continuous performance, and much fresher.
The most famous of these locks, so Dad  informed  me-and he must have been right, because the skipper left his wheel to a skilf ul kiddo I admit I envied,  and  came  along  among the  passengers to say the same-was one called Boulter's lock. It had a little bridge, like in -Japanese murder pictures, and a big wooded island, and according to Dad, in the days of Queen Victoria and King  Edward and all those historic monarchs,  it was  the  top hip rendezvous for the dudes and toffs and mashers, and their birds. Personally (though naturally, I didn't say so), I found it a bit gloomy-a bit sad and deserted and un-contemporary, like so many  glorious monuments your elders-and-betters point out to you proudly from the tops of buses. And when we sailed on afterwards into a section they called Cliveden reach (only you don't pronounce it that way, because it's a square thing to do with educated words), which apparently is one of the scenic glories of the nation, I admit I was considerably wrought down. It was like the canal at  Regent's  Park,  only,  of  course, bigger: I mean great woods of dangling trees like parsley salad, wringing themselves out into the river,  all rotting  away gradually, and  old:  which,  of  course,  England  is,  I  mean  all  those  ancient
cities, but it seems even the nature part of it can look like that  as well.
But now I was growing a bit nervous: because I knew when we'd get out of this Cliveden lily-pond, the next stop would be the place called Cookham. Now, when I'd imagined the whole scene, lying back at home upon my spring divan, I'd thought-well, I know it's foolish, but I had-I'd thought of Suze's house being a little white thing set beside the river, and the boat going slowly by, and she coming out just at that moment (without Henley, need I say), and seeing me there on the deck like the Captain in H .M .S . Pinafore, and throwing a kiss or two at me and pleading to me to alight, and
the boat pulling in beside her garden, and me getting off into her arms.
 
ABSOLUTE   BEGIN N ERS	155
Well, naturally, as the day grew older, I knew that wasn't going to happen, but I'd put off  deciding exactly what  I should  do: e.g., get off or not, and how to find ·Suze's dwelling, if I did. But just after Cookham lock (which comes a bit before the place itself), while  I was still hesitating about it all, and feeling kind of paralysed, and wondering if perhaps I even wanted to see Suze at all, it was  Dad who came, unexpectedly, to my assistance-though in  a  very awkward way. Because when we'd set sail again  after  the  lock thing, and I was already cursing myself for doing nothing, and we were just going to go underneath the metal bridge there,  Dad slumped on to my shoulder, and passed out.
So  I  propped  him  up  and  ran  and  told  the  skipper,  who  wasn't pleased  and said we could hop off  at the next  lock we  came to. But I said  no,  that  was  no dam  good,  that  Dad  was  a  sick  man,  under Dr A. R. Franklyn's care of  Harley street, and that  I had to get him to  the  Cookham  doctor  quick,  and  if  he  didn't  stop  his  .boat  im­ mediately,  I'd  hold  him  personally  responsible.  And  then'I  turned round  to  all the  passengers,  and  said  in  a  loud  voice  my  Dad  was dying and the skipper didn't care a darn about  it-in fact, as you've guessed, I became a bit hysterical.
Well, I know mums and dads by now, and if there's one thing any official person hates, it's when they turn on him in a body-or, so far as that goes, if there's anything like a fuss. Some nosey, interfering passengers, thank goodness, took a look at Dad,  and  said  I was quite right-they wanted to get rid of him too, I could soon see, because nobody likes sickness, especially on a holiday. So the skip­ per slowed the boat down, and pulled in near the bank there, and bellowed at an old geezer who was mending boats just beside  the iron bridge (or that's what his sign said he was  doing),  and the geezer rowed out in a little boat, and we got Dad down into it, and pulled off, and the pleasure boat sailed on.
By the time we landed on the slipway, Dad had fortunately re­ covered; which I was bloody glad of, because I did feel a bit guilty about bundling him into the little  boat-and  in  fact,  about  my whole hysterical performance. The old geezer helped him into the boathouse, into the shade, and yelled at his wife to get a cup of tea, and get on the blower to the local national health  representative, who turned  up before long, not very pleased to be interrupted   from
 






 
 


 
156	COLIN  MACIN NES
his test tubes and hypodermics, and Dad not very pleased to see him either, because he said this was a lot of fuss about nothing,  and   we
 


' In London?' 'Yeah.'
 
A BSOL U TE  BEG I N N E RS	157
 
should  have  stayed  up  there  on  the  boat,  and  what  the  hell:  so
neither of them was very co-operative with the other. And this Cookham doctor said there was nothing much wrong with Dad that he could see (I'd heard that  one before!),  and what  he needed  was a rest, and then get on the bus and go straight back  home  to bed, and slumber.
So the boat-building geezer fixed Dad in a deck-chair with a hood on it and tassels, and his wife came up with further reviving cuppas, and I said a bus would be too slow, and cost what it would, I was going to get Dad back to London in a taxi. The geezer said he'd phone through to the local car-hire, but I said no, just to give me the address, and I'd go off and fix things personally, and that would give Dad time for a short nap to set him up again, and me a chance to have a swift dekko at this lovely beauty-spot. So off I went.
This Cookham is a real old village like you see on biscuit boxes: with a little square church, and cosy cottages, and roads made of mud, and agricultural numbers trudging about them doing  whatever it is they do do. I asked one or two for the address I wanted of the car-hire, and they were very relaxed and friendly, and didn't talk  a bit like country people do in variety spots and things, and when I followed their directions, I came round a stack of corners . . . and wham! I saw Suze's house there! Yes. I mean, it was the same house I'd imagined in my vision, near enough . . . at any rate, I didn't ask any more directions, but just walked in through  the  front garden, and round the side to the lawn  beside  the  river,  and there,  sitting on the grass listening to the radio, I saw Suze. And only Suze.
'Hullo, Crepe Suzette,' I said.
She looked up, but didn't get up, and stared at me a minute, and said, 'Hi.'
I came up a bit nearer. 'You all right?' I said. 'Yes,' said Suzette.
'Henley well?' I asked. 'Oh, yes,' she said. 'Can I say hullo?'
Suze had got up on her two knees, and her hands falling down between them. 'He's up there,' she said.
 
I got dowu 011 my knees too. 'Su I'll miss him,' I said. 'Yes,' said Suzette.
And then-well, it was like we were shoved at each other from behind by two great enormous hands. And there we were, all mixed up in a bundle, me clinging on to Suze, she clinging on to me, and Suze sobbing like a child-I mean, great dreadful sobs more like groans, it was really awful.
Well, that went on for quite a while, and I'm not  conventional, but I thought, hell! there's windows all over the dam place, even though this is the country, so I kept saying, 'Suze, Suze,' and bash­ ing her on the back, and kissing her face when I could get at it, and 'Suze, take it easy, kid, do relax, girl, please take it easy.'
So after quite another while, she got herself straightened out, and sat back on the grass, and looked at me with her face red as a tomato, as if I was suddenly going to disappear (which you can bet I wasn't), and I said to her, because I just couldn't dam well resist it­ you must remember what I'd been through myself, and that I loved this girl Suze with all my heart-I said, 'And so it didn't turn out all right, then.'
She just said, 'No,' and then kept on saying, 'No.'
Now, you must realize, all this time, I had Dad's health, too, in my mind, and the anxiety to get him back quite safe, though God knows how I wanted to remain there, so I got a bit brisk and businesslike, which I admit must have seemed very unfeeling to her, and said, 'Well, hon, why don't you skip?'
'I can't, darl,' she said. 'He can't stop you, Suze!' 'It's not that, I just can't!'
They won't give you a reason, will they! They won't ever  give you a plain reason! 'Suzie, why not?' I cried.
Here we had another session of those dreadf ul sobs, which, honestly, were ghastly. 'Do stop that, Suzette!' I cried, banging the girl quite hard . Because honest, I couldn't take very much more of them .
'Because it's spoiled!' she cried, all mixed up with hair and bits of clothes, so as I could hardly dig what she was saying. 'I've spoiled what  we used  to be-it's gone!'
 


 
158	COLIN   M ACI N N ES
'Bollocks!' I cried indignantly. She'd got me in a grip like au all-in wrestler. 'It was a mess,' she kept saying. ·It was just a mess.'
Isaw this was the moment  for swif t action . So Iyanked  her  away from  me  so  as  Icould  see  her  (which  most  of  the  time  had  beeu quite impossible,  because all Icould see of  her was her spine), and  I saidIhad Dad there, and a car, and we'd both run  her  up to  London
-	but  though  Isaid  it  at  least  half  a  dozen  times  or  more,  it  just didn't  register  with   Suze.  She  only  kept  on  saying,  'No,  no,  no, no, no.'
So Igot  up  and  stood. 'Look,  Suze,' I  cried . Tm  your  boy-see? Your  one and only. And  Ilive up  in  London,  and you  know  exactly where.  And  I'm  waiting  for you  there,  this  evening,  tomorrow,  and every  day  until  the  day  Idie!'  Igrabbed  both  her  shoulders,  and joggled  her. 'Have you heard what I said?' I shouted.
She said, yes.
'And have you understood me?' Yes, she said, she had.
'Then  I'm  waiting!'  Icried,  and  bent  over  and  gave  her  a  really fierce,  everlasting  kiss,  then  said,  'See  you  very  soon,'  and  waved, and rushed off out of that garden like Dr Roger Bannister.
There in the road, Ihad to stop, because  suddenly  I felt faint, just like  Dad,  and  had  to  sit  down  on  the  ground,  which  was  the  only thing  Icould  find  to  sit  on.  Then  Igot  up,  and  grabbed  the  first cat I saw, and asked  him  to lead me to the car-hire number-which he did, very nicely-and  the cat was fortunately  in  (I mean  the car­ hire  cat),  and  he  came  round  to  the  boat-building  place,  and  we collected  Dad,  and  said  goodbye  and  thanks  very  much  indeed  to the old  geezer  and his wife,  and  made  it off for  London,  which  the driver said would cost us exactly eight-pounds-ten .
Well,  on  the  way  home,  Dad  perked  up  quite  a  bit:  in  fact,  he even started singing some George Formby numbers,  and older songs he'd  heard  from  his  own  dad,  of  Albert  Chevalier  and  historic  old veterans  like that, and apparently the Cookham  driver  knew  quite a few of  them too, and  they had  several rousing choruses,  and  argued as to which old music-hall artiste first sang what. But me, need Isay, Ididn't  feel  a  bit  like  that,  and  was  car-sick  as  well,  which  I've always  been  prone  to  if  somebody  else  is  driving,  and  in  fact  I wanted  to  tell  Dad   about  my  troubles,  but   you   can  see  how   I
 
ABSOLUTE  BEG IN N ERS	159
couldn't-and anyway, even at the best of times you can't tell even your father and mother anything that really matters to you.
Soon we were in the outskirts, and though I'd enjoyed the country,	. I was so glad to be back there in the town again-it was like coming home. And before very long we  were  in  Pimlico,  and  when we pulled up, Dad had to go in and get the money, as even between    us
we hadn't got enough, and that brought Mum and Vern out on the pavement, and out of his second-floor window, the beefo Malt.
Nobod y  seemed to dig how dangerous it had been  to Dad:  all we got  was  exclamations   about  why  had  I  taken  him  away  without telling anybody,  and where  the hell had  we both  been  to,  and why did  a  taxi  cost  us  eight-pounds-ten-even   Vern  chipping  in  with helpful  observations-till  Iwas  so  embarrassed,  in  front  of  that Cookham  driver,  and  the Pimlico population,  that  I went  up to the bunch  of  them  in  a  fury,  and  shouted,  'If  you're  going  to  kill  my father, don't kill him in the streets, but let him get into his bed!'
This changed the atmosphere,  we all tramped inside, and got Dad stowed  away,  and  then   Mum  turned   on  me,  and  said  now  she wanted to know exactly what all this was about, and Isaid okay, I'd dam well tell her, and Vern tried to join  in the party,  but  we turfed him out and went down into the parlour.
'Sit down,' said my mother.
Igot  hold  of  both  her  shaulders  (just  like  I  had  with  Suze)  and shoved her in a chair-though she's a darn sight tougher-and said, 'Now, you sit down, Ma, and just you listen to me.'
Then  Ilet  her  have  it.  Isaid  she  was  the  most  sel6sh  woman  I knew  of,  that  she'd  made  Dad's  life  a  torture  ever  since  I  could remember, that as for a mess like Vern  he was none of  my responsi­ bility, but  as for me, her son by  Dad, she's brought  me  up so that  I just hated her, and was ashamed of her.
· 'Is that all?' she said, looking back at me as if she hated me too. 'That's about all,' I said.
'You want to go now, son?' she said to me next.
This took me aback a bit. I said nothing, but just waited there. 'Well,' said my mother. 'If you can take it, you can stay and   listen
to this. Your father's been no use to me at all ever since I married him.'
·He produced me,' I said, staring at her very, very hard .
 

 


 
160	COLIN    MACI N N ES
'He just about managed that,' she said. 'That was about his lot.'
Now at that moment, I wanted to strike my mother: like she'd done me, a thousand times or more, when I couldn't hit back, and I wanted  to  hit  her  real  hard-hard,  and  get  it  over;  and  I  took  a
 
ABSOLUTE  BEG IN N E RS	161
'Yes. Yes, I suppose you are. But let me tell you this. Since that night you turned up in the tube shelter, eighteen years ago, which I don't suppose even you remember,  I've seen you're fed and   clothed
and  brought  up,  best  I  could, till  you  can  take  care  of  yourself, as
 
step in her  direction. She saw very  clearly what  was coming,   and
 
you seem to think you can, and that was
 
.
qmte an
 
ffort,
 
.	,.
sometimes.
 
she didn't ·move an inch. And I'm very glad to say that, when I  saw
this-though of course,  all this happened  in  a  moment-I  didn't hit at her, but said, 'Whatever Dad may have been, or may not have been, you married him.'
'Yes, I married him,' she said, sarcastically and very bitterly.
'And whatever you feel about Dad,' I went on, 'if you made up your mind to have me, you were supposed to love me. Mothers a.re supposed to love their sons;'
'And sons their mothers,' my mother  said.
'If they get a chance. There's  not  one  that  doesn't  want  to,  is there? But they must get a bit of it back, a little bit of encourage­ ment.'
At this old Mum just sighed, and gave me a crooked smile, and looked very wise, I must say, in her way, though very nasty,   too.
'Now, you listen to me,' she said, 'and  I don't  give  a  b----r  what you think. In the first place, I made you, here (and she banged her belly), and if you think that's easy, try it yourself some time.  With­ out me, and what I went  through,  you'd  not  be  here  insulting  me like you are. And in the next place, although your father means nothing to me at all, in fact just the contrary, I've stuck by him, not thrown him out, as I could have done a hundred times if  I'd wanted, and made things  very much  easier  for me by  doing so. And in the third place,  as for you  . . .'
I interrupted. 'Just a minute, Ma,' I said. 'Why did you  ask me, just two months ago, to come back here again, if anything went wrong with Dad?'
She didn't answer, and I pressed  it  home.
'Because you can't do without a man here-I mean, a legal man­ and you know it, don't you. And you couldn't have got rid of Dad, like you say you could, because I know you, Ma, if you'd been able to, you would have, but you couldn't help yourself.'
She looked at me. 'You're getting sharp, aren't you, boy,' she said. Tm your son, Ma.'
 
She put her old, fetching face on one side, and said, 'You're not very easy, you know. You've not always been very  easy.'
'I dare say not, Ma,' I said.
'As for loving you,' my mother went on, 'well. Listen, son. You don't love or not love because you choose to--even your own son. You love if you do, and if you don't, you just don't, and there's no good at all pretending. You'll find out it's true what .1 say whe you grow older. Or I dare say you're so clever that you ve found it out already.'
I sat down too, three feet away from her.
'Okay, mother ,' I said, after a while, 'let's leave it at that.'
'If you say so, son,' she said to me.	.
Then Ma did a thing she'd never done with me ever before, which is to get up and go to the glass cupboard with the orange lace cover on it which I remember so well from all our other addresses in their turn.' and which we were never allowed to go within a mile of, and she got out a bottle of port, and poured two glasses in green crystal goblets, and handed me one, and said, 'Cheerioh.'
'I don't drink, Ma,' I said.
'Don't be a cunt,' she said to me. So we had a tipple.
Then  Ma  said,  what  about  my  father?  Well,  then-I  hope it
wasn't betraying Dad, but I did think she ought to know-I told  her all about Dr A . R. Franklyn , and how he really ought to go into hospital, and she listened without interrupting  (the  first  time  she'd ever done that with me in her life, either), and just  shook  her  head, and said, ' He'll never go  in  there  voluntary.  But  give  me this doctor's particulars, and if he's  takt>n  really  bad  again,  we'll  just have to put him  in.'
So I did that.
Then, when I camt'  to  go, just  by  the  doorway, there  was  a  sort of pause, and what was in  both  our  minds  was,  should  we  have a kiss  or  notr  We  looked  at  each  other,  then  both  laughed   together
 
162	COL I N  M ACIN N ES
suddeuly, and she said, 'Oh well, son, let's skip it, you're  a  real nasty little bastard, aren't you,' and I gave her a big clump and said, 'Well, Ma, you should know abotit that,' and hopped it quickly.
I looked up at the clock at the Air Terminal, and saw if I made it quick, I'.d catch the latter portion of the Czar Tusdie concert, with Maria Bethlehem singing with him as soloist. The venue was up in the north part, in a super-cinema with  academy  of  dance attached, so on the rank there I grabbed a taxi (who'd been hoping for transatlantics at the terminal, and wasn't pleased so much with ouly me), and shot off up across the town. I certainly felt in need of a lift an<l soothing music, after all the excitements of the day.
And that's what jazz music gives you: a big lift up of the spirits, and a Turkish bath with massage for all your nerves. I know even nice cats (like my Dad, for example) think that jazz is just noise and rock and sound angled at your genitals, not your intelligence, but I want you to believe that isn't so at all, because it really makes you feel good in a very simple, but very basic, sort of way. I can best explain it by saying it just makes you feel happy. When I've been tired and miserable, which has been quite more  than  often, I've never known some good, pure jazz music fail to help me on.
Now, I've explained a club for jazz people, and also a jazz club, but a jazz concert is something different still. In this, several hund­ red cats, and  even often these  <lays thousands,  gather  in as    large a hall as the impresario can hire, and listen to the best selection of soloists and combos, English and American, that the impresario can offer for the price-which is by no means low. Of course, in these concerts, even the greats often disappoint you, because a big hall or cinema is no more the real place for jazz than  a  railway station would be for a tea party. But if your luck is in, they often overcome this disadvantage, and you hear some really marvellous sounds. And then what's so nice is to hear them in company with so many hundreds of like-minded kiddos-sharp, and eager,  and  ready  to give of their best, too, if the performance is up to standard-and although I kuow jazz addicts are supposed to be a lot of morons, you'd really be asto11ished how these fans will all sit and listen.
Well, Czar Tusdie's, of course, is one of the great bands  of all time, and American, and coloured. And as for Maria Bethlehem, I'd say that, second to a great like Lady Day (who, to my mind's right
 
A BSOLUTE  BEG IN N E R S	163
up there  on  an  Everest  peak  all of  her  very  own).  se's  te world's best  female  jazz   singer  that  there  is.  So  you  can  1magme  I  was thoroughly  impatient in that  vehicle, and kept  advising the driver  of short cuts and to accelerate, which he took  no uotice  of whatever.
He dropped me on the corner just  before  the  picture-pa lace,  and so I had to walk past the dance academy, and there, on the pave­ ment,  I paused  a second, because  I saw  a notice  on  the  wall  which
said,
CURRENT  CLAS SES
MEDALLISTS CLASS BEGINNERS   PROGRESSIVE  CLASS
BEGINNERS PRACTICE ABSOLUTE   BEGINNERS

and I said out loud, 'Boy, that one's us! Although me, after my experiences, maybe I'm going to move up a category or   two!'
Well, as I went in through  the foyer, and gave my ticket  up to the appropriate  cat, I heard,  {rom outside, that  really marvellous  sound, which  is  the  strains  of  jazz  music  when  it's  real  and  true:  truly  a heavenly  sound,  it  seems  to  me  to be.  An<l  honestly,  when  I  die­ when  that  day comes  that  must come-I'd wish  for  no  other ending of  it all than  to hear that  Czar Tusdie band  playing  for me  as it  did just  then:  because  their  sound  was  so strong  and  gent.le, just  like it would  carry  you  right  up  on  its  kind  notes  to  paradise.  An<l  then there  was  a  roar  and  whistles,  and  the  fans  all  applauded  like  a football  crowd,  and  I went  in  and  got  my  seat just  in  time  to catch
the entrance of  Maria .
Maria is big, an<l no longer a young  woman,  but  she  walked  on the stage just like a girl:  quick  feet, easy  gestures,  and  a  face that's so <lam friendly, though it can also be kidding you, and sometimes quite severe. She's l ike a girl, yes, but she's  also, in  a  strange way, just like everybody's M um : she welcomes you  all,  takes  charge of you all, and from the very moment she comes  on,  you  know that you're all there with  her  in  safe  hands.  And  straight  away she swings into the song she's chosen, no tricks, no crafty pauses, no hesitation whatsoever, and what she does to the songs is unbeliev­ able: I mean, she takes even quite familiar  standards  and  turns them   inside  out,  and   throws  them   right  back   at  you   as  though
 
 

 


 
164	COLI N    M ACI N N ES
they've become nobody's but her own-Maria's. And  she  can  be witty as hell, throwing everything away and  shrugging,  but then, the next moment, rising like a bird, and sweet or melancholy. But whatever she does-and this is the whole thing about Maria Bethlehem-her singing makes you  feel it's absolutely  wonderful to be alive and kicking, and that human beings are a dam fine wonder­ ful invention after all.
They rose to her at the end-all those hundreds  of  English boys and girls, and their friends from  Africa  and  the  Caribbean-and they practically had to gouge us all out of that auditorium. Cats I didn't know from Adam said, hadn't it been great, and one cat in particular then said, had I heard about the happenings at St. Ann 's Well, up in Nottingham, last evening? I asked him, what happen­ ings? not taking it very much in (because I was still back there wit!l Maria Bethlehem), when I realized he was saying there'd been riot­ ing between whites and coloured, but what could you expect in a provincial dump out there among the sticks?
 




IN SE PTE M BE R
 

I w A S up very early on that  morning,  as  if  with  a  private  alarm clock in my brain, and it was one of the most  beautif ul  young  days I've ever seen. The dome of the heavens,  when  I looked  out  up  at it over my geraniums, was pale pink glowing blue,  with  nothing  in it but a few stray leaves of cloud, lit up gold and green by sun you couldn't see behind the houses. The air was  fresh,  blown  right  in from the sea, and there wasn't a sound except from hundreds of thousands of pairs of lungs, still slumbering there in Napoli . Peace, perfect peace, I thought, as I sucked in  the  warm  air  of  my  native city. And  it was  also, as it happened,  my  nineteenth birthday.
I put  on  some music  and  abluted,-then  made  two  Nescafes and
carried  one down  for  Hoplite.  The  cat  was  absent.  Waste  not  want not,  I  decided,  so carried  them  further  down  to  Cool.  Another  cat out on the ti_les last night.  No  use  disturbing  Big Jill that  early, so I drank  both  cups  on  the  front  doorstep,  and  stood  there  taking  in the scene.
And I saw this. Coming down the street, from the N . Hill Gate direction, were a group of yobbos, who most probably had been out at some all-night jungle-juice performance too, and who straggled across the street and pavement in that messy way they have, and whose bodies were all wrong somehow-I mean with lumps and bumps in the wrong places-and whose summer drag looked hastily pulled on. And coming up the street, from the Metropolitan Railway direction, were two coloured characters-not Spades, as it hap­ pened, but two Sikh warrior products, with a mauve and a lemon turban, and with stacks of hair. Well, when the two groups met, the Sikh characters stepped to one side, as you or I would do, but  the yob lot halted, so as it was difficult to pass by,  and there  was  a short pause: all this just outside my door.
Then one of the scruffos turned and looked at his choice com­ panions, and grinned a sloppy grin,  and  suddenly  approached  the two Sikh characters and hit one of  them  right  in  the  face:  with  his fist pointed so that the top knuckles got inside the skull. So long as I live, I swear, I shall never forget the look on that Asian number's face: it wasn't at all fear, it wasn't at all rage, it was just  complete and  utter  unbelief  and surprise.
167
 


 
168	COLI N    MACI N N ES
Then the other Sikh one shouldered up beside his buddy, and the yobbos drew away a bit, then both the two groups separated,  au<l the oafo lot went off laughing down the hill again, and the Sikhs started chatteriug and waving their arms about. They walked on a little bit, then turned  and looked back, then went off  chattering  and
,    waving again up hill out of sight and   sound.
Now, you will be asking, what about me? Did I run out and take a poke at the chief yobbo, and bawl the bunch of little monsters outr The answer is-I did not. First of all, because I simply couldn't believe my eyes. And next, because the whole thing was just so meaningless, I suddenly felt weak and sick: I mean I've no objec­ tion, really, to men fighting if they want to, if they've got a reason. But this thing! Also-I don't like to say this much, but here it is-I myself was scared. It doesn't seem possible such sordids as this lot could frighten you, and certainly one wouldn't, or even two or three of them . . . But this little group: it seemed to have a horrid little mind, if you can call it that, all of its own, and a whole lot of unexpected force behind it.
I ran down in the area and called  Big Jill. She took  a while  com­ ing to the door, and shouted had I no discretion, there were chicks sleeping on the premises, but I shoved past her into her kitchen and told her what I'd just seen. She listened, asked me several questions, and  said,  'The bastards!'
'But what should I have done, Big Jill?' I cried. 'Who-you? Oh, I dunno. I'll make you  a cup of  tea.'
As she started banging crockery about, and pulling her red slacks on over her huge hips without any by your leave, I found that I was shivering. When she handed me the cup, she said, 'You might like to take a look at this.'
It was a leading article in the Mrs Dale daily which the Amberley Drove character, who you may remember, wrote for, and  it was about the happenings a week ago up  there  in  Nottingham.  It said the chief  thing was  that  we must  be  realistic,  and  keep  a   proper
I sense of due proportion. It said that many influential journals­ including, of course, this Mrs Dale production-had long been warning the government that  unrestricted  immigration, particularly of coloured persons, was most undesirable, even if such persons came  here,  as  by  far  the  bulk  of  them  undoubtedly   did,    from
 
A BSOLUTE  BEG I N N ERS	169
countries under direct colonial rule, and countries benefiting by the Commonwealth connection . But Commonwealth solidarity was one thing, and unrestricted immigratio11 was quite another.
Then  it  had  a  word  to  say  about  the  coloured  races.  England,  it said,  was  an  old  and  highly  civilized  nation,  but  the  countries  of Africa  and  the  Caribbean  wne  very  far  from  being  so  indeed.  It was  true  that  the  West  Indian  islands  had  enjoyed  the  advantages of   British  government   for  many  centuries,  but  even  in  these  the cultural  level  was  low,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  and  as  for  Africa,  it should  be  remembered  that,  a  mere  hundred  years  ago,  some parts of  that vast  continent  had  never  even  heard  of  Christianity.  In their own setting, coloured folk  were no doubt admirable  citizens, accord­ ing  to  the  standards  that  prevailed   there.  But  transported   unex­ pectedly   to  a  culture   of   a  higher   order,  serious   difficulties   and frustrations_ must inevitably arise.
' Must I go on reading all this balls?' I shouted at Big Jill. 'It's up to you,' she said.
Then it went on to give you the facts about the coloured com­ munities who'd  come to settle here in the UK.  Many were  toilers, it did not deny, as could be seen by those courteous and efficient public transport servants, but many were layabouts who thrived on the three-pounds-ten they got from the National Assistance. This led to labour troubles, and we must remember that the nation had been passing through a slight, though of course temporary, recession. Pressure on housing was another problem . It was true that many coloured folk-for reasons that were more than understandable, and need not be detailed here-found difficulty in securing accommoda­ tion in the better sections of most towns. It was also true that many West Indians, in particular, had saved up enough from their wage­ packets, over the years, to purchase houses, but unfortunately these were generally speaking little other than slum property, which further deteriorated when they moved into them, to the disadvant­ age of the rate-paying  citizens as a whole.  Moreover,  it was not u nknown for coloure<l lancllonls to evict white tenants-often old­ age pe11sio1wrs- by making their lives impossible.
Then there was the matter of d ifferent  c:11stoms.  By  ancl large, said the article, English people were renowned for their decent and orderly  behaviou r.  But  not  so  the  immigrants,  it  seemed,  or    very
 


 
170	COLIN  M ACI N N ES
many of them. They liked haggling  in  the  shops,  prodding  fruit before they bought it, leaving the hi-fi on all night, dressing in flashy clothes, and, worse still, because this made them more conspicuous, driving about in even flashier vehicles, which they had somehow managed  to  acquire.
Then there was the question of the women . (Old Amberley certainly went to town on this woman question!) To begin with, he said, mixed marriages-as responsible coloured persons would be the very first to agree themselves-were most undesirable . They led to a mongrel race, inferior physically and mentally, and rejected by both of the unadulterated communities. But frequently, of course­ and this made the matter even graver-these tainted offspring were, in addition, the consequence of unions that were blessed neither by church nor state. More, said the piece. The well-known propensity and predilection of coloured males for securing intimate relations with white women-unfortunately, by now, a generally observed phenomenon in countries where the opportunities existed-led to serious friction between the immigrants and the men of the stock so coveted, whose natural-and, he would add-sound and proper instinct, was to protect their women-folk from this contamination, even if this led to violence which, in normal circumstances, all would find most regrettable.
But this was not all: it was time for plain speaking, and this had to be said. The record of the courts had shown-let alone the personal observations of any anxious and attentive observer-that  living off the immoral earnings of white prostitutes, had now become all too prevalent  among the immigrant  community. No one would  suggest
-least  of   all  this  journal-that  in  each  and  every  such  immoral union,  the  guilty  male  was  a  coloured  person  since,  of  course-as figures published  recently  in  its columns  had  unfortunately  made  it all too  clear-the  total  estimated  figure  of  active  prostitutes  in  this country  did  not  itself  fall  far  short  of  the  total  numbers  of  male coloured    immigrants    of    the    appropriate    age.    Nevertheless, the  disproportionate   number   of   coloured   'bullies'   could   not   be denied.
'Christ!' I said, putting the dam thing down. 'I just can't go on with this!'
·Stick it out,' Big Jill said. 'I'll make you another cuppa.'
 
A BSOLU TE  BEG I N N E R S	171
Several  conclusions,  this  Drove  one  continued,  flowed  inevitably
-and  urgently-from  these  grave  matters  and,  more  particularly, from  the  recent  disturbances  at  Nottingham ,  which  everyone-and especially  his  M rs  Dale  daily-so  greatly  and  so  vehemently   de­ plored. The first was, that  immigration  by coloured  persons,  whether having  an  identical  citizenship  status  as ourselves  or  not, should  be halted  instantly.  Indeed, the whole  process  should  be  reversed,  and compulsory  repatriation   should  be  given  urgent  and_  serious    on­ sideration  by  the  government.  Meanwhile ,  it  went  w1th?ut  sa  mg, law  and  order  should  be  enforced  most  rigorously  and  impartially, however  great the provocation  may have been-and ther: may wel, it  must  be  admitted,  have  been  provocation   on  both  sides.  But  1t was only a minority-chiefly persons  known  by the name  of  'Teddy boys'-who  had  actually  been  guilty  of  a  physical  breach  o   the Queen's peace,  and  these  youths  should  undoubtedly  be restramed: though  many  might  feel  that  such  young  people-who  were  far from  being  characteristic  of  the  youth  of  the  country  as  a  whole­ were  psychopathic  cases,  in  greater  need  of  medical  attention  than of drastic punishment by the courts of law.	.
The occurrences  at Nottingham , A. Drove wound ·up,  could  m   no
way  be  described  as  a  'race  riot '.  No  comparison  with  large-scale disturbances  in  the  southern  states  of  America,  or  in  the  Union  of South  Africa ,  was  therefore  tenable.  By  the  swift  and  determined action  of  the  Nottingham  authorities,  we  could  rest  assured  that  no more  would  be  heard  of  snch  lamentable  incidents-which  were entirely  alien  to  our  way  of  life-provided,  of  cours_e,  immediate action  along  the  lines  suggested  by  the  Mrs  Dale  daily  was  taken without fear or favour.
r put  this  thing  down  again. 'The man  isn't  even  funny,' I  said to
Jill. 'And I don't believe he's even stupid-he's just wicked!'. " Take it easy, breezy,' said Big Jill.
·And  there's quite a lot of  things that he's left  out!'
·I don't doubt you're right,' she said to me.
·And the whole point is-he's not denounced this thing! Not de­ nounced this riot! All he's doing is looking round for  alibis.'
Jill sat  down  and  started  on  her  nails .  'He's  just   ignorant,' she
said, ·not wicked .'
I cried out: 'To be ignorant , and tell people, is wicked .'
 


 
172	COLIN    MACI N N ES
She looked up from her nail polish. 'All it comes to,' she said, 'is if you've got a black face in a white or off-white neighbourhood, everything you do's conspicuous. You just stick out like a sore thumb.'
'Everything you  do!' I said, picking up the Dale daily and  rolling it into a tight sausage. 'But what do they do, different from all the hustlers living in this slum?'
'You tell me,' said Jill.
'Look! There's more coloured unemployed than white. Everyone knows that. And not only layabouts: yon see them queueing at the Labour every day for hours.'
'Yeah,' said Big Jill.
'And you know what it's like when they try to get a room: "no children, no coloureds".'
'I suppose,' said Jill, 'if you hate the one, you also hate the other.' 'As for white illegitimates, are there none around here, would  you
really say?'
'I don't know many myself who aren't,' Big Jill said.
'And what about white chicks?' I cried. 'Don't they  like  it?  I mean, hasn't everybody seen them hanging around the Spades?'
'I've seen more than a few,' Jill said.
'And those ponces. Are none of the bastards Maltese, Cypriots, even home-grown products, just occasionally?'
'Plenty,' Big Jill said, looking up. 'Oh, sorry, Big Jill.'
'It's okay, baby.'
'What's the matter with our men?' I said to her. 'Can't they hold their own women? Do they have to get this pronk (and I bashed the Dale daily on to the chair back) to help them and protect them?'
'J should have thought,' said Jill, beginning on her right hand, 'there should be more than enough girls to go round for every- body.'	'
I stuffed the rolled paper among the tea-leaves. 'The whole thing, anyway,' I cried, 'is that what really matters is being missed. And here it is. If every Spade in England was a hustler, that's still no excuse for setting on them ten to one.'
Big Jill didn't answer me this time, and I got up.
'I don't  understand  my own  country  any more,'  I  said  to her. 'In
 
A BSOLUTE   BEGIN NERS	173
the history  books,  they  tell  us the  English  race has  spread  itself  all over the  dam world:  gone and settled everywhere,  and that's one of the great, splendid English things. No one invited us, and we didn't ask anyone's permission,  I suppose. Yet  when  a few hundred  thous­ and come and settle among our fifty millions, we just can't take it.'
'Yep,' Big Jill said.
' Upstairs,' I continued, 'I've got a brand new passport. It says I'm a citizen of the UK and the Colonies. Nobody asked me to be, but there I am. Well. Most of these boys have got exactly the same pass­ port as I have-and it was we who thought up the laws that gave it to them. But when they turn up in the dear old mother country, and show us the dam thing, we throw it back again in their faces!'
Big Jill got up too.'You're getting worked up,' she said. 'You bet I am!'
She looked at me. 'People in glass houses . . .' she said. 'What does that mean?'
'Listen, darling. Personally, I live off mysteries, and that doesn't give me the right to be particular. As for you, you peddle porno­ graphic pictures round the villages, and very nice ones they are, I don't deny. But that makes it rather hard for you, it seems to me, to preach at anybody.'
'I don't dig that,' I said, 'at all. You can hustle, and still be a man, not a beast.'
'If you say so, honey,' Big Jill answered . 'And now I must turf you out, the chicks will be screaming for their breakfast.'
'Oh, 6ne then, Big Jill.' I went to the door, and said to her,  'You are on my side, though, aren't you?'
'Oh, sure,' she said. Tm all for equality . . . If a  coloured girl comes in here she's every bit as welcome as the others . . .'
'I see,' I said to her.
She came over and put her hammer-thrower's arm across my shoulder. 'Don't worry, son,' she said, 'and don't take  things too much to heart that aren't your business. The Spades can look after themselves . . . they're big strong boys.• A lot of them are boxers . . .'
'Oh, yes,' I said. 'But remember what I saw just now. Put Flikker and twenty Teds inside the ring tooled up with dusters in  their gloves, and there's a sort of handicap.'
' Flikker's been sent away,' she said.
 

 
174	COLIN  MACIN NES
'Oh yes? He has?'
'He's on remand in custody.'
'This is the first time I've liked a magistrate.'
Big Jill came out into the area. 'It's not  the  Teds  you  have  to worry about,' she said, 'but if the men join in it, too. The men round here are rather  a tough  lot.'
'I've noticed that,' I said to her, going  out  to  take  the padlocks off my Vespa.
'Where are you off to, baby?'
Tm going to take a look around my manor.'
As soon as you passed into the area, you could sense that there was something on. The sun was well up now, and the streets were normal, with the cats and traffic-until suddenly you  realized that they weren't. Because there in Napoli, you could feel a hole: as if some kind of life was draining out of it, leaving a sort of vacuum in the streets and terraces. And what made it somehow worse was that, as you looked around, you could see the people hadn't yet noticed the alteration, even though it was so startling to you.
Standing about on comers, and outside their houses, there were Teds: groups of them, not doing anything, but standing in circles, with their heads just a bit bent down. There were motor-bikes about, as well, and the kids  had  often  got them  out  there  at  angles on the roadway, instead of parked against the kerb as usual,  for  a natter. Also, I noticed, as I cruised the streets, that quite a few of those battered little delivery vans that I've referred to-usually dark blue, and with the back doors tied on with wire, or one door off­ had groups around them, also, who didn't seem to  be  mending them, or anything. There were occasional lots of chicks, .giggling and letting out little yells, a bit too loud for that time of the morn­ ing. There were also more than the usual number of  small kids about. As for the Spades, they seemed to creep a bit, and keep in bunches. And although they often did this anyway, a great   number of them were hanging out of windows and speaking to each other loud across the streets. As I continued on, I came to patches once again where all was absolutely as before: quiet and ordinary.    Then
-turn  a corner,  and  you  were  back  once  more  in  a  part  where  the whole of  Napoli seemed like it was muttering .
Then I saw my first 'incident' (as A. Drove wrote it)-or, as  you
 
ABSOLUTE   BEGI N N ERS	175
know, my second. Here it was. Coming along, pushing a pram and wearing those really horrible clothes that Spade women do (not men)-I mean all colours of the spectrum and the wrong ones put together, and with shoes like Minnie Mouse-was a coloured mum with that self-satisfied expression that all  mums  have.  Beside  her was her husband, I imagine it was-anyway, he was taHcing at her all the time, and she wasn't listening. Then,  coming from  the oppo­ site direction (and there always seems to be an opposite direction), was a white mum, also with kiddie-car and hubby, and  whose clothes were just as  dreadful  as the  Spade  mum's  were-except  that the Spade girl's looked worse, somehow, because you could see, at any rate, that she was trying, and hadn't given up all hope of glamour.
Well, these  two met  and,  as there's  no  law  of  the road  on pave­
ments, both angled their prams in the same direction, and collided. And that started it. Because neither would give way, and the two men both joined in, and before you knew where you were, about a hundred people, white and coloured, had appeared from absolutely nowhere. Quite honestly! I was watching the thing  quite closely from near to, straddling my Vespa on the roadway, and one minute there were two (or three) people on each  side,  and  next minute there were fifty.
Now,  even then, if  in  normal times,  the thing would  have   passed
off, with the usual argument, and even then, if someone had stepped in and said, 'break it up,' or 'don't be so fucking idiotic,' all would have gone well-but no one said this, and as for coppers, well, of course there wasn't one. Then somebody threw a bottle,  and that was it.
That  milk  that  arrives  mysteriously  every  morning,  I  suppose   it
brings us life, but if trouble comes,  it's  been  put  there-or  the bottles it comes in have done-by the devil. And dustbins, that get emptied just as regularly, and take everything away-they and their lids, especially, have become much the same thing: I mean, the other natural city weapon of war. They were soon both flying, and I had to crouch behind my Vespa, then pull it over, when I got a chance, behind a vehicle.
Even then, it was still, in a way, if you'll believe  me, rather    fun:
I mean, the bottles flying, and the odd window smashing, little  boys
 
176	COLIN   MACIN NES
and girls running round in circles shouting, and people weaving and dodging, like they were playing a sort of  enjoyable,  dirty game. Then there was a scream, and a white kid collapsed, and somebody shouted a Spade had pulled a knife. It's always those attacked who give the pretext-don't we  know!  Anyway,  there  was  some blood for all to see.
Then, just as suddenly, the Spades all ran, as if someone  had told them to on a walkie-talkie from headquarters somewhere-and  they dived round comers and inside  their  houses,  slamming  doors. Honest! One minute there were  white  and  coloured  faces  battling, and the next there were only white. There was a lot of shouting and discussion after that, and a few more bottles through the windows where a Spade or two was peeping out, and the white  kid  was carried on the pavement where I couldn't see him, and the  law arrived in a radio-car and told everybody to disperse. And that was that. All over.
Then, a bit later, came incident number two-or three. Along another road I was prospecting, I saw driving along quite slow, because anyway it was pulling up, one of those 'flashy cars' A. Drove was on about, and four Spades in it-and the driver handling  the thing in that way Spades often do, i.e., very expertly, but as if he didn't realize it was a machine, not a wonderful  animal  of some kind. Well, two of those delivery vans I spoke of sandwiched it like the law cars do in us crime films, and out from the back and front of them came about sixteen fellers-those from the back spiling out as if they were some peculiar kind of cargo the van had  on board that day. And these were not Teds, but men-anyway, up in the twenties, somewhere,  I  should  judge- and  this  time  there  was no
, previous argument whatever, they just rushed at that vehicle, and wrenched the doors open, and dragged out the Spades, and crun­ ched  them.  Of  course,  they  fought  back-though  once  again, there was that same brief hesitation  as I'd noticed  with the  Sikhs that same moment of complete surprise. Two were  left  lying, and got kicked (those boys certainly knew all about vulnerable parts), and two made away, one weeping; and about a hundred of my own people gathered round about to watch.
And about those who watched, I saw something new to me, and which  you  may  find  quite incredible-but  I swear  it's the  truth I'm
 
A BSOLU TE  BEG I N N E R S	177
telling you-they didn't even seem  to enjoy  themselves   particularly
-	I mean, seeing all this-they didn't shout, or bawl , or cheer; they just stood by, ont of harm 's way, these English people did, and watched . Just like at home at evening, with their Ovaltine and slippers, at the telly. Quite decent, respectable people they seemed, too: white-collar workers and their wives, I expect, who'd probably been out to <lo their shopping. Well, they saw the lads get in the Spades' car, and drive it against a concrete lamp-standard , and climb back in their handy little delivery vans, and drive away. And once again, that was that. Except that a few coloured women came out an<l tended the men lying there, who the bystanders I spoke of had come up a bit nearer to, to examine.
Then came another incident-and soon, as you'll understand, I began to lose count a little, and, as time went  on,  lose count  a  bit of what time was, as well. This one was down by the Latimer road railway station, among those criss-cross of streets I mentioned earlier, like Lancaster, and Silchester, and Walmer, and Blechynden. In this part, by now, there was quite a muster: I mean,  by now people realized what was happening-that there  were  kicks  to be had if you came out in the thoroughfare, and besides, the pubs were emptying for the af ternoon. And they all moved about like up in Middlesex street at the market there  on  Sunday,  groups shifting and re-forming, searching. People were telling about what had hap­ pened here, or there, or in some other place, and they all seemed disappointed nothing was happening for them then and there.
Well, they weren't disappointed long. Because out of the Metro­ politan Railway station-the dear old London Transport, we all think so safe and so reliable--came a bunch of passengers, and  among them was a Spade. J ust one. A boy  of  my own  age, I'd say,  carrying a hold-all and a brown paper parcel-a serious-looking kiddy with a pair of glasses, and one of those rather sad, drab  suits  that  some Spades wear, particularly students, in order to show the English people that we mustn't think they're savages in grass  skirts  and bones stuck in their  hair,  but  twentieth-century  numbers  just  like we are. I think he was an African: anyway, there's no doubt that's where his ancestors all came from-millions of  them,  for  centuries way back in time.
Now,   this   kiddy   must   have   been   rather   dumb.   Because    he
 


 
178	COT.IN   M A C.I N N ES
evidently  didn't  rumble  anything  was  at  all  un nsual-perhaps  he'd come  down  from  Manchester  or  somewhere, to  visit  pals.  Anyw.ay. down  the  road  he  walked.  stepping  aside  politely  if people  were  in his  way,  and  they  all  watching.  All  those  eyes  watching  him,  and the  noise  dropping.  Then  someone  cried  out,  'Get  him! '  and  the Spade dug it  quick  enough  then-and  he  started  running  down  the Bramley  road  like  lightning,  though  still  clutching  his  hold-all  and his parcel,  and  at least a hundred  young men chasing  after him,  and hundreds  of  girls  and  kids  and  adults running  after them, and  even motor-bikes   and  cars.  Some  heathen   god  from  home   must   haw shouted  sense  into his  ear  just  then,  because  he  dived  into  a  green­ grocer's  and  slammed  the  door.  And  the  old  girl  inside  locked  it from  within,   and   she  glared  out   at  the   crowd,   and   the   crowd gathered   round   there,  and  they  shouted-and   I'm   quoting  their words  exactly-'Let's  get  him!'  and  'Bring  him  out!'  and  'Lynch him!'
They cried that.
But  they  didn't  get him . What  they  got,  was  the  old  greengrocer women  instead, who  came out  of  another  door,  and  went  for them. Picture this! This one  old  girl, with  her  grey  hair  all in  a mess,  and her  old  face  flushed  with  fury,  she  stood  there  surrounded  by  this crowd  of  hundreds,  and  she bawled  them  out. She said they  were  a stack  of  cowards  and  gutter  bastards,  the  whole  lot  of  them,  but they started shouting back  at her, and I couldn't hear .  But  she didn't budge, the old  girl, and  her  husband  had  got  the  shutters  up  inside, and by and by the law made  its appearance  with  some vans  as well this  time,   and  they   got  through   the   crowd,   and  started   milling round,   and  collected   the  young   African,   and   moved   among  the mob  in  groups  of  six  and  told  it  to  disperse-with  truncheons  out this time, just for a change.
I  went  off  after  this  to  be  a  bit  alone.  I  rode  out  of  the  area  to the  big  open  space  on  Wormwood  Scrubs,  and  I  sat  down  on  the grass to have  a think . Because  what  I'd  just  seen  in  there  made  me feel  weak  and  hopeless:  most  of   all  because,  except  for  that  old vegetable  woman  (who  I  bet  will  go  straight  up  to  heaven  like  a supersonic  rocket  when  she  dies-nothing  can  stop  that  one),  no one,  absolutely  no  one,  had  reacted  against  this  thing.  You  looked round  to  find  the  members  of  the  other  team-even  just  a  few  of
 
A BSOLUTE  BEG IN N ERS	179
them-and there weren't any. I mean, any of us. The Spades were fighting back all right, of course, because they had to. But  there were none of us.
When  this  thing  happens  to  you,  please  believe  me,  it's  just like
as if the stones rise up from the pavement there and hit you, and the houses tumble, and the sky falls in. I mean , everything that you relied on, and all the natural things, do what you don't expect them to. Your sense of security, and of there being some plan, some idea behind it all somewhere, just disappears .
I  <lusted  my  arse,  and  rode  down  Wood  Lane to the White City,
where the old BBC's building that splendid modernistic palace, so as to send their telly messages to the nation. And I looked at it and thought , ' My God, if I could get in there and tell them-all the millions! Just take them across the railway tracks, not a quarter of a mile away, and show them what's happening in the capital city of our country!' And I'd say to them, 'If you don't want that, for Christ's sake come down and stop it-every one of you! But if that's what you do want, then I don't want you, and for me, it's good-bye England!' Then I turned back again inside the area, inside those railway tracks that hem it in-out of White City into Brown Town
-	and as I was travelling past the station  there,  I  saw  another small encouraging sight, and stopped and looked.
This was  a small old  geezer, with  a cloth  cap and  a choker,  who'd
got hold of a young Spade so tight I thought at first he was arresting him, or going to damage him in some way. But no! Apparently this boy must have told the geezer he lived up in Napoli, and was a bit dubious about going home, and this old codger, feeling his youth again, must have grabbed him by the arm, and said, 'You're okay, son, come with me,' and set off holding the colcured boy with a look on his face as if to say, 'If you touch him , then you touch me, too!' And  I wondered  why  it was the only_two I'd seen  who'd  fought ba  k had been old-timers?     .
But that gave me an idea. I rode back to the White City station, parked my Vespa , and went insid e to have a look around . And sure enough, there was a young Spade standing there, and I went up to him, and gave a great big smile I didn't feel, and said, how's tricks? and would he care for a lift home on my Vespa? He seemed a bit doubtful,  but  I  asked  him  where  he  lived  and  went  on chatting
 

180	COLI N  M A CI N N ES	A BS OLUTE  BEGI NNER S	181
 
him, beea use I've found if you keep on talking at anyone who sus­ pects you, the mere sound of your voice usually wins them  over,  and he said Blenheim crescent, and I said hop on then, and I'll see  you there. As we went out, a ticket number said, was I  carrying my  iron bar, just  in case? Real witty.
So I batted along, and I tried to make conversation  with  the kiddo, but he just clung 011 and said, 'Yeh, man!' to  everything  I said, and as we reached the groups of bystanders we got one or two yells and whistles, and the odd brick, and a few kids ran out on the road in front of us, but I weaved or accelerated, and we got through to Blenheim crescent without trouble. I was keyed up, expecting motor-bike chases, and big mobs, but nothing happened. And that was the extraordinary thing that day in Napoli!  It all popped up here, and subsided, then popped up there, then somewhere else, so that you never knew what streets were frantic, and what streets peaceful.
Well, I saw the kid to his door, where lots of dark  faces  were peering through the curtains, and he asked me -in a moment. Well, frankly, I was a bit dubious now. It wasn't that I was afraid of my own people seeing, so very much, but I was  a  bit  scared  of  the Spades themselves!  After  all, one white  face is so much  like  another
-especially on a day like this. However,  I  thought  I  really must stop being scared, or I just wouldn't get anywhere, and so  I said sure, why not, I'd be glad to, but could I bring my Vespa in  there and park it in the hall.
Well, he took me down to the basement, and there I found a  sort of war cabinet of West Indians in progress. The boy made it clear, right away, that I wasn't a P. o.W. or something, and they patted me on the back, though several still looked dam suspicious, and wouldn't talk to me. They gave me a glass of rum, and one said to me, what did I think about all this? And I said I was disgusted and ashamed . Well, one of them said, at any rate, I was the first white man they'd seen that day who looked them in  the  eye  whn  he spoke to them.
And then the phone rang, and a tall Spade with a bald head picked it up-and would you believe it, he was through on the blower to Kingston, Jamaica! And he had quite a natter with the folks back home, and I didn't m uch like a lot of what he said, and I
 
wondered how my owu people, out there in Kingston, surrounded by thousands of black faces, would be feeling when the news of it got arou nd? And I also wondered whether, all over Napoli, there wereu't other Spades calli11g Tri11idad, a11d Ghana, and Nigeria, and Christ knows where, and telling them the story? And  how  all the whites in all those places would  be treated, too? Because  one big mistake a lot of locals make is to think that all Spades work on the London Transport or on building sites-whereas stacks of them are business and professional men, who know all the answers: for example, this bald-headed character turned out to run a chain of hairdressing  establishments.
Then  one of  the Spades who was still suspicious  of  me  said, did I think  it  was  the  English  way  of  life  to  attack  6,000-odd  in  an  area where  there  were  60,000  whites   or  more,  and  if   us  white  boys wanted  to show how brave  we were, why  didn't we choose an  area like  Harlem,  where  the  whites  were  a  minority?  I  could  think  of  a lot  of  answers  to  that,  but  the  others  shut  him  up  immediately-in fact, what  amazed  me  the  most,  in  the  middle  of  all this,  was  how dam polite they all were to me. And then they started chatting about plans,  and  one  said the law  was  no  use  whatever,  they  must  set  up vigilantes;  and    nother  said  anyway,  they'd  got  to  organize  as  a community,  and  keep  it that  way  in  future;  and  another  said  up  in Nottingham,  they'd  moved  Spades  out  of  certain  areas  'for  their own  safety',  but  if  anyone  tried  to  move  him,  he  was  dam  well staying where  he was, because  this was his  house,  and  his wif e and kids  were  born  here,  and  he'd  had  a  bash  in  the  RAF,   and  he  was one  of  the  Queen's  objects  the  same. as  any  other.  And  I  began  to get  embarrassed,  as  you  ca  imagine,  because  of  course  I  partly agreed  with  them,  but  also  I  wanted  to  stick  up  a  bit  for  my  own people  somehow,  if  I  could .  And  the  hairdresser  cat  realized  this, and  he  and  the  kid  I'd  brought  there  saw  me  to  the  door,  and opened  it  cautiously,   and  said  all  was  clear,  and  I  trundled  my Vespa  down  into the  road.  And  the  kid  came  out  to  the  pavement, and said thanks for everything, and shook my hand and gave me  one of those smiles that Spades can turn on when they feel like it.
Well now, I thought, I'd better look in back home, to see if any­ thing was happening there, and also to find out if Cool was quite okay.   So  I  started  off,  and  made  the  comer,  where   eight  or      so
 


 
182	COLIN   MACIN N ES
crashed the bike, and slung me off, and next thing I was  standing against  a wall with  faces six inches from me. And  what  I liked   least of all was that the oafo nearest me was carrying something wrapped in a science-fiction  magazine.
Now luckily, the happenings of the day had made me so indig­ nant, I wasn't frightened any longer. And also, although I'm a nervy sort of number, when a crisis comes, I usually surprise myself by keeping calm-however much  my ticker's pounding  there inside.  So I stayed still -as a rock, and eyed the yobbos, waiting, with one hand in one pocket round my bunch of keys, and the third finger through the ring of it.
'We sore yer,' said an oafo. 'Darkie-luvver,' said another.
When I glimpsed the SF number  un-wrapping  his  chopper,  I whipped my keys across his face, and kicked another you-know­ where. Then it was on! I was tensing for the death-blow as  I thrashed about, when suddenly I realized  I was  not  alone in this­ in fact, for just a moment, I had nobody to fight with, because two other kids were fighting them, so without waiting  to  raise  my  hat and ask who the hell they were, I ran over to my fallen  Vespa, grabbed the metal pump, and cracked it on some skulls, and see! the Teds were in flight, except for one lying whimpering on the pave­ ment, and I was shaking hands with Dean  Swift  and  the  Misery Kid.
'Dr Livingstone, I presume,' said Swift. 'You bet your bloody life it is!' I cried.
'That feller hurt me,' said Misery, rubbing his hands and looking very pale and angry.
'My Gawd!' I cried, messing their hair-dos for them and almost kissing them. 'It had to take this to bring you two together!'
The Ted on the deck was trying to get up, and the Dean pushed him down and held his neck with his Italian shoe. 'We heard there'd been happenings,' he said, 'and thought we'd come up and take a dekko.'
'It's all in the evening papers,' said the Kid.
Well, was I un-displeased! And was I glad it was two  ktds of  my own age, and two jazz a<ldicts, even if of different  tendencies, and even  if  one was  a  layabout  and  the  other  a  junkie,  because_ this
 
A BSOL U TE  BEG IN NERS	183
seemed to me to show their admiration for coloured greats like Tusdie and Maria really meant something to them .
The Dean had picked up my Vespa, and he checked the  motor, and then said, 'Well, how we to now? What we go where we do?'
'What about this one?' I said pointing to  the  Ted,  who  the Misery Kid was holding by his hair.
The Dean approached him. 'You're full of shit, aren't you,' he said, whizzing his fist round within a half -inch of the zombie's face.
'Wot I dun?' asked the yobbo .
And that's it! He'd scare you stiff inside his little group, but  now he looked such a drip you couldn't even get vexed enough to crunch him .
'Wot you dun?' said Dean Swift. 'What you've clone's get born­ that was your big mistake.'
The yoblet, seeing he wasn't going to get fixed, had plucked up courage from somewhere. 'Ar,' he said, 'so a few of ver blacks git chived. Why oll ver fuss?'
The  Dean  swung  him  round,  gave  him  a  Stanley  Matthews  kick on his strif!e      ink  j(@, and told  him  to beat  it fast. At the  corner, the  thing  cried   out,  'Cum  back  te1morrer   fer  ver  nest  lot!'  and cut out.
Well then, as we were discussing this, and examining the yobbos' chopper, who should come round the corner but a cowboy: one of that youthful, pasty sort, with shoulder-blades, and a helmet not too secure, and boots too big for his athletic feet-usually the least pleasant, those young ones, that is, if any are. And he looked at the Vespa, and we three, and the metal pump, and the chopper, and he said, 'What's this?'
'You're prompt on the scene, son,' said the Dean.
'I said, "What's this?" ' the law repeated, pointing at the chopper. 'This,' said the Dean, 'is what the local lads you can't control   tried
to do my pal with.' 'What pal?' 'Me,' I said.
'And why you holding that pump?'
'Because I used it to defend myself ,' I told him . 'So you were in it too,' the cowboy said.
'That's right.'
 

 

 
184	COLIN  M A CI N N ES
'But you say you got attacked.'
'You're beginning  to dig, mate,' said  Dean  Swift. 'You're speedy.'
The copper stared at the Dean. But  the  Dean  had  carried that look often enough before, and stared right back . 'You call me "officer",' the cowboy said.
'I didn't know you  were one, captain . Ithought  you  were  a junior constable.'
The cowboy looked round, as if wishiug for rei11forcements, and said, 'You're  all coming to the station.'
'Why?' asked Dean Swift. 'Because Isay so. That's why.'
The  Dean  gave  a  crazy  yell  of  laughter.  And  though  Isympa­ thized  with  his  attitude, Iwasn't  pleased,  because  all  Iwanted  was to get to hell out of here immediately .
'Look, captain,' said  Dean  Swift.  'Aren't  you  supposed  to  arrest the law-breakers? Well, that's the way they went-all  the  whole click of them.'
'If you don't shut your trap,' said the cowboy, 'I'll knock  you  off as well.'
'Why?' said the Dean. 'You afraid of Teds, then?' 'Take it easy, Dean,' I said.
'Boy, of course he is!' cried Swift, turning to Misery and me, as if he was explaining something perfectly well known to all. 'He's young, he's alone, he's not used to trouble of this kind-he's used to pinching parkers on the broad highway.'
This cop turned rather  red,  and,  thauks  to  Swift's  efforts,  broke the number-one rule of the copper mystery, which is never to argue. Because as soon as the public hears a copper argue, and see he's a human .being like any other (well, let's be generous), they know he's only a worried  man in fancy-dress.
'We're not afraid of trouble,' the young cowboy said.
'Oh, no!' cried the Dean, really getting in the groove  now. 'If there's sufficient of you, certainly you're not. We all remember how you cleared the streets so thoroughly when old B. and K. came here, or Colonel Tito. But if you're a few, and the trouble rises round you, and metal like this lot's flying, you can't take it, and can't stop it! Not here in this dump you can't, anyway . If it was Chelsea or Belgravia , you'd stop it soon enough, maybe . . .'
 
A BOLUTE  BECINNETIS	185
Now,  all  the  while  he  was  needling  the  cowboy,  Swift, we  both saw, was edging a bit  away from  him , and tlirowi11g  a glance or two at .tvlisery and me, who were doing likewise, and  suddenly  the Dean shouted to  me, ·Your  place!'  and  pushed  the chopper  at the  copper (handle  first,  though),  and  when  he  backed  away  a  second, we  all scattered,  and  while  the Dean  lured the  law,  Imanaged  to make  it off with Misery on my Vespa.
Iyelled  at  him  as we bowled  along:  'Our  city's  dangerous!  They
don't know it, but our city's getting dangerous! ' 'You too!' the Kid cried, as we shot a junction .
'They've  got  to  know   it!'  Ishouted .  'We've   got  to  tell  them somehow!'
'Yeah,'  Misery answered,  as we turned  into my alley.
There were  no signs of  anything back  home,  and  Imade  it  up  to the  first  floor  and broke  in on  Mr  Cool. There he  was, sure enough, but  with  one  white  eye  and  strips  of  plaster,  and  his  half-brother Wilf,  who  you  may  remember.  'Hi!'  we  all  said,  and  Iasked  Cool for the fable.
They'd  got  him,  he  said,  down  by  Oxford  gardens,  where he's
been  visiting  his  Ma,  when  they  threw  burning  rags  in  through  the window,  and  Cool had  gone out to  make  objections . And  when  the argument  developed, his brother  Wilf  (much to m_y  srprise,  I     ust say)  had  shown  that  blood  was  thicker  than  preiud1ce,  and  sailed out  and mixed  in on Cool's behalf.  A passing  cat, who'd  turned  out, of all things, to be a county councillor, had given  them a lift home in his jalopy,  and there they both were for all to see.
'Well, what  you  think  of  all this, Wilf?'  I couldn't  resist asking
the number.
'We ain't seen the end of it,' he said rather sourly, 'that's all I  got ter say.'
'The  law's  losing  its  grip,  if  it  ever  had  any,' said  Mr  Cool. 'The
two lots are just  going where it isn't , and having it out   there.'
·Surprising!' the Misery Kid said.
The law never settled m uch round these  parts,  any  time,'  said Wilf.
Well, now  I  had  to  do  a thing  I'd  already  decided,  which was
make a few telephone calls. So  I  collected  all  the  fourpennies  I could, and went down to Big Jill's, where I fou nd  nobody in, but     got
 






 
 
186	CO i.I N  M A C.I N N ES
the key fom  its hidey-hole in the toilet cistern,  and  fetched  out  my pocket  diary,  and  started  business  on  that  blower.  Because  Iwas determined  to  call  every  cat  t hat  I  could  think  of,  and  tell  them about what was going op.
At the best of times, when you call twenty numbers in a row, as you can do to fix a party, you don't get more than half of them, as is well known. And I only got a quarter-as well as those where I couldn't hack my way beyond the secretary, or even the switch­ board starlet. I got V. Partners, who listened  patiently,  and made some intelligent comments, and said it was disgraceful, and I  must get some snaps of it, if I could, for the exhibition . Mannie was out but Miriam dug at once what I was on about, and said she'd ge; Mannie over as soon as she'd made contact. I got through to Dido at the Mirabelle, and she said I was a naughty boy to break in on her evening meal, but certainly, she'd tell her editor all I said, and a lot of her best friends were coloured. At the Dubious and Chez Nobody they seemed more interested, and said they'd spread the tale   around.
By  this  time  I  was  running  out  of  pennies,  and  had  to  have  a summit conference  with  the operator  as to whether  I could  have  all the calls I was entitled to if I put  in silver pieces. I drew blank  with Call-m:-Cob,ber,  which  perhaps  was  lucky,  and  Zesty-Boy's  secre­ tary said she d see he got the message-yes she'd written  it all down. I  even  called  Dr  A.  R. Franklyn,  who  listened  carefully,  and  asked how  was  my  Dad,  and  said  would  I  please  be  careful  of  myself. Then  I   nocked  off  Big Jill's meter  money from the  rubber  ash-tray shaped hke a bra she keeps  it in, and called the  Mrs Dale daily, and asked  for  Mr  Drove.  I  got  through ,  much  to  everyone's  astonish­ ment,  and  told  him  he might  not  remember  me,  but  he was  a lump o shit, and I'd do him if I ever saw his face again-whether carrying h1.s  furled  umbrella,  or  not  doing  so.  I  felt  better  after  this,  and crash-land:d,_after  the third try,  at a session  the ex-Deb was having out  at  Ch1sw1ck,  and  although  she  sounded  raving  to  me  over  the blower,  she  said  she'd  be  right  along.  I  even,  as  well,  thought  of trying  Suze  and  Henley  at  the  Cookham  place  and  in  the  London showrooms,  but  I skipped it. Of  course I tried  Wiz, but  only got the dialling tone-not even Wiz's woman .
But even with the cats who dug it  best,  the  great  difficulty  I had was  in  getting  over  what  was  happening:   I  mean,  the  scale  of   it,
 
A BSOL UTE  BEGIN NERS	187
how serious, and that this was supposed to be the British Isles. Because even though most of them had heard something of  it by now, there seemed to me to be a sort of conspiracy in the air to pretend what was happening in Napoli, wasn't happening: or, if it was, it somehow didn't signify at all.
I shot off after this up to my penthouse, to wash off the mud and blood, and have a lay down for a moment, and a bite. And while I was doing so, there was a , little knock, and on me walked the Fabulous Hoplite. He was looking a bit diminuendo, and smiled rather nervously, and was wearing a beach-gown and his Sardinian slippers.
' My!' he said. 'What times we live in!'
'Sit down, beautiful. You can say that again.'
'You've been bruised , child,' he said, trying to grope my tribal scars.
'Hands off the model, Hop,' I told him.  'How have things been with you?'
The  Hoplite  got  up,  spun  round  so  that  the  beach-gown  did  a Royal   Ballet  thing,  and  sat  down  again   and  said,  'Oh,  no  com­ plaints . . . But I don't like all this.'
'Who does?'
'Somebod y must,' he said, 'or it wouldn 't happen.' 'Clever boy. You been out at all?'
He let the gown fall open to reveal his pectorals. 'Once was enough,' he said. 'A glimpse, and I was in again .'
'Wise child.'
'I suppose you've been out fighting battles! ' His eyes gleamed. 'The battles fought me.'
He folded the gown. 'I've heard some terrible tales . . .' 'Yeah?'
'Oh, yes.  Ecoutez-moi.  The  whore  at  the  sweet  shop-the  skinny bitch-said to  me, "And  when  my  husband  got  up, he  was  holding his back, and I saw there was a knife in it".'
'Whose knife?'
'A dark stranger's. Really, darling, I know  you  love  them,  but they're so rough. And somebody else I know has had thirty-seven stitches in  his throat.'
'Just like a necklace.'
 


 
188	COLIN   M ACIN N ES
'Oh! Don't be so callous!'
Th: Hoplite once more arose. 'The innocent suffer for the guilty,' he said, with a little sigh. 'I expect all that most of the serfs who live
in this sewer really long for, is just to be left alone-I mean,  persons of both tints and textures.'
'Yep,' I said .
'Me, for example,' said the Hoplite. 'A pervert like me,  with the fattest file, for my age,  in  the  vice  depa1tment's  system,  simply wants to avoid m ud being stirred up  needlessly.'
I got up too, and said, 'I love you, Hoplite, who doesn't , but I really must tell you some day that you're a tit.'
'You thin k so?' he said, quite pleased. 'Or, in plain speech, a fool.'
'Oh, I don't like that . . . Not at all.  You  see, I  set very  great  store by your opinions:  even though  they're sometimes so severe. . .  .'
'Well, if you do, Fabulous, may I say, I think the world's divided nto those who, when they see a car crash, try to do something about 1t, and those who stand by and gape.'
'You looked like John the Baptist when you said that.' 'You never met him.'
The Hoplite smiled. 'But you, dear!' he said . ' We all heard you shrieking on the telephone, and isn't what you're doing exactly that? Bringing in a lot of gapers?'
'No,' I said.
'No?'
'No. I want witnesses . Friends who will witness this thing, and friends who'll show the Spades this two square  miles  isn't  being written  off as a ghetto.'
:And.you think, sweet, that would improve matters?' Yes.
'Really?'
'Yes. If they .saw a few normal, healthy faces around here, it would lower the temperature they're all trying to build up. If the Spades saw a few hu ndred different kinds of kids who admired them,  and  the  Teds  saw  a  few  hundred  of  the  coloured   nurses
who'll have  to  stitch  them  up  in  hospital,  it  certainly  would  make a difference.'	·
'But they're  not very important   people.'
 
A BSO L U TE  BEG I N N E ns	189
'Well, Hoplite, let's bring them in too! This is their big opport­ unity-the one they've been waiting for to prove their  words  about the kind of country this is! Let's have some of those public figures who haunt the telly studios, to advise us what to do! Let's have the thinkers of the left and right to tell us how they'd handle this one! Not from their home base, but from here! Let's have the bishops and ministers, to hold an inter-racial service in the open  air!  Isn't this their big chance? And let's have the Queen in  all her glory, riding through the streets of Napoli, and saying: "You're all my subjects! Each and every one of you's my own!"'
The Hoplite shook his head in pity, gave  me  a  little  wave, and blew .
I  got  my  bend-torch  out  of  a  drawer,  because  it's  always  best  to have  a weapon,  if you  can, whose  explanation's  innocent,  and  I got my  blood-donor's  card  in  its  perspex  folder  (which  I'd  got  when  I started  giving  the  pints  after  Dr  F.  had  cured  me),  because  this always  seems to  impress  the law-not  much, but  just  a bit-if  they grab you  and turn  out your pockets,  and  I stuffed my new passport in  my  arse  pocket  as  well,  I  dunno  why,  just  for  luck,  I  suppose.  I took up my Rolleiflex,  but put it down  again, because  it didn't seem useful  any  longer.  Then  I  put  on  my  buckle  belt,  and  a  zip  jacket that's  like  a  sabre  if  you  swing  it by  one  arm,  and .went  down  the stairs where, coming down as well, I ran into Cool.
'You taking the night air too?' I said. 'Yeah. I'll have a look around . . .' 'Be cool, Cool.'
'Oh, sure, white boy.'
I stopped the cat before the door, and took both his arms and looked at him, and said, 'I hope this isn't going to turn you sour, man.'
He smiled (quite rare with Cool). 'Oh, no . . .' he said. 'We don't turn sour-:-we must object. And you,' he added. 'I suppose it's not nice for you to feel your tribe is in the wrong.'
'Thanks, Cool,' I said. 'I bet you're the only  Spade  in Napoli who's thought of tts.'
I slapped his arm, and we both went out into the dark, and this time I'd decided not to take my Vespa. On the pavement, without speaking about this, we shook hands and both went different  ways.
 


 
190	COLIN   M ACIN NES
There's no doubt night favours  wickedness:  I  mean,  I  don't think the night's wicked, and I love it, but it opens the trap for all the monsters to come out. I  went  down  by  Westbourne  Park  station, and took a ride along the sceuic railway to the Bush. The train was packed with sightseers from the West, who hopped out at different stations for the free display. From the height between the stops, you could see the odd fire and firemen  and,  at  sudden  glimpses  as  the train rocked by a street at right angles, the crowds, and law cars prowling, or standing parked with cowboys  packed  in  them,  waiting for action, like bullets in a clip. And when the train halted, at Lad­ broke and by Latimer, you could hear loud-speakers blaring some­ thing harsh and meaningless, like at Battersea pleasure  gardens,  in the funfair there. And all along the ride there were patches of blue­ black  darkness, then sudden glares and flares of  dazzling   light.
But  at  the  Bush,  I  was  amazed.  Because  when  I  crossed  over beyond  the Green, to that middle-class  section  outside  our  area-ali was peace  and  quiet  and  calm  and  as-you-were-before.  Believe  me! Inside the two square miles of  Napoli,  there was blood  and thunder, but  just  outside  it-only  across  one  single  road,  like  some  national frontier-you  were  back  in  the  world  of  Mrs  Dale,  and  What's  my line?  and  England's   green   and  pleasant   land.:.. Napoli  was  like  a prison,  or _a concentration  camp:  inside,  b_lue  murder,  outside,  buses
and evening papers and hurrying  home  to  sausages  and  mash  and tea.	·
I bought a late night edition by the telly theatre there. They were playing it up-big headlines, no paper can resist that-but also trying to play it down. Reactions from Africa and the Caribbean it said, had been unfavourable, but much exaggerated. There wa a bit of gloating in South Africa and the us South, which, in this difficult situation, was greatly to be deplored. The cardinal fact to remember was that neither at Nottingham- nor even at Notting Hill, so far-had there been any loss of actual life. Meanwhile a cat at Scotland Yard had issued a message to discou'rage sightseers. I threw the thing away. The law never wants you to see what it can't handle. Then I went back inside the area again.
I walked down an empty street that was lit, as a lot  of  them are round there, by lamps put up in Queen Boadicea's day, when I saw, coming along, three  coloured  cats,  keeping  together.  I looked around
 
A BSOLU TE  BEG IN N En s	191
to see if  they  were being chased  or anything,  but  they  weren't,  so I went  up and said, 'Hi, boys,  what's  cooking? '-when  I saw that  one of  them  had  a  spanner,  it  looked  to  be  (anyway,  something  metal), and  they  made  a  rush.  Boy,  did  I  gallop!  With  those  three  sons  of Africa  racing  after  me  and  hissing!  I made  for  a  pool  of  light,  and dodged  round  some vehicles,  and  batted  across  a road  straight  into Mr Wiz. 'Hold it!' he cried, and the coloured cats saw I had  an ally, and melted  like a falling gleam. 'Boy!' I cried, slapping the old Wiz like a carpet-beater.  'Am I glad to see your  wicked  face! Where the hell  have  you  been,  man,  I've  been  seeking  for  you!'  The  Wizard took  my  arm, and said,  'Cool it, kiddo,'  and  just  round  two  corners we found ourselves in the middle of a large assembly.
This lot were being addressed by a thing from the White Protec­ tion League, whose numbers were also distributing leaflets  round the throng. The speaker on the portable platform  was  a  man of quite ordinary appearance-i.e., the kind you'd find difficult to describe if someone asked you after-except that now he was lit up and jet-propelled by a sort of crazy, electric frenzy. He  wasn't talking to anybody- to any human cat you could imagine, even the very worst-but out into space, out into the night  to  some spirit there, some witch-doctor he was screaming to for help and blessing. And looking up at him, in the yellow-coloured glare, were the white faces he was protecting, all turned, by the municipal lamps above, into a kind of un-washed violet grey.
I nudged Wiz. 'He's round the bend,' I said. Wiz didn't answer.
'I said he's flipped, boy!' I shouted, above the noise of the loud­ speaker.
Then I looked at Wizard. And on my friend's face, as he stared up
at this orator, I saw an expression that made me shiver. Because the little Wiz, so tight and sharp and trim  and  dangerous,  had  on a little smile, that showed his teeth a bit, and his wiry little body was all clenched, and something was staring through his eyes that came from God knows where, and he raised on his toes, and shot up his arms all rigid, and he cried out, shrill like a final cry, 'Keep England white!'
I   stood   there   a  moment,   while   the   mob   roared   too. Then	I
grabbed  Wizard's  neck  clothes with all the strength I have  in   my
 


 
192	COL IN   M A CI N N ES
body,  and  I  yanked  him  round  about  off  balance,   and  I  hit  him with  all  my  life  hehind  it,  and  he  stumbled.  Then  Ilooked  round quick, and saw how it was, and ran.
Luckily,  Iknew  Napoli:  and I got away easier than  I'd hoped  and feared.  Round  by  Cornwall  crescent,  I  ran  into  an  area,  and  stood there,  panting.  Then  I crossed  Ladbroke  grove,  and  made  it  up  the rise, keeping along the railings .
Under  a  light  ahead,  Isaw  a  peculiar  figure:  it  was  an  African trader well known  round the area, a long, lean old number who nms a  little  shoplet  specializing  in  imported  products  that  the  Spades like  for   their   cuisine.   He   usually  wears   an  antique   suit  and  a battered  Anthony  Eden,  but  tonight  he  was  in  his  full  regalia-I mean,  he  had  on  his  African  robes,  and  was  standing  outside  his house there, all alone, and waiting.
Iwent  up  and  said  'Hi!'  and  asked  him  what  the  score  was.  He said this ,·:as his home,  and his wife and children were inside it, and he  didn't  want  to  hurt  anyone,  but  if  anyone  wanted  to  damage them, they'd  have to have a word with  him first. He'd been  standing out  there  all day,  and  meant  to continue standing there,  he  said, as lo,ng  as these  hooligans  were  around. Iloved  the  way  that  old  boy said that  word,  'hooligan'! It came right  out of  his  stomach,  and he threw  it  up  through  his  big  lips  like  it  was  a  nasty  mess  he  was vomiting  up. Isaid to him, 'Stick to it, daddy,' and I liked his  robes, and  as.soon  as  Igot  a  chance  Iwas  going  to  Africa  to  see  all  the cats  wearing  theirs  like  on  the  travelogues,  and  from  out  of  some­ where there he fished a panatella  for me, and Ilit it, and made it up the road again.
Soon  Icould see lights. So Ihurried  on, and came on the outskirts of  another  crowd,  andJ9und  they  were  gathered  round  the  Santa Lucia  club,  which  is  a  BWI  clip-joint  about  as  glamorous  as  an  all­ night  urinal.  There  were  several  hundred  milling  there:  and  what added joy  to the whole  scene, was the presence  of  newsreel  and  TV cameras,  with  arc  lamps  and  the  odd  flare  and  flashlight,  as  if  the crowd  were  extras  on  a  movie  lot.  And   directing  the  whole  lot, standing on  a car roof  with  a microphone,  was-yes, you've  guessed it-Call-me-Cobber.  That  certainly  was  the  evening  of  his  career­ the  big  scoop,  our  dauntless  reporter  right  there  in  the  firing  line! And  as  for  the  Teds  and  hooligans,  well,  they  can  smell  a  camera,
 
ABSOLU TE  BEG I N N ERS	193
even a Press one, from a mile away, and there's nothing they like better than seeing their moronic faces next morning in the tabloids, so this was their big opportunity as well.
'Child!'  shouted  someone,  and  Ilooked  across,  and  there,  stand­ ing  up  in  the  back  of  a  cream  vintage  Bentley,  was  the  ex-Deb-of­ Last-Year.  Istruggled  across,  and  found  she  was  with  a  bunch  of Hooray  Henries,  who  seemed,  Iwill  say this  for them,  a  bit  doubt­ ful if all this was really so dam amusing. And  as for the ex-Deb, she leaned  out  of  her  vehicle,  and  said, 'That crowd's nothing  but  a lot of bloody scum.'
'You're telling me,' I said.
'And what is that place?' she asked, waving a hand at the Santa Lucia club.
'A  local  nitery.  You  like to  take  a  spin  around  in  there?'  Iasked
-a bit  sarcastically,  Imust  admit, because  if  the yelling crowd  out­ side  didn't  do  you,  the  Spades  down  in  there,  if  there  were  any, most certainly would, if you attempted to get in.
'Certainly!' she cried, and she spoke up a bit loud even for my liking. Td love to have a dance with someone African! They're the best dancers in the world!'
So she told me to get in, which  Idid thinking,  'Oh, well!' and the Henry at the wheel got the car up near the entrance, with  everyone, when  they  saw  the  ex-Deb  and  the  Henries,  imagining,  Isuppose, that  this  was  some  item  in  the  television  programme.  The  ex-Deb and  Igot  out, with  a  Hooray  or  two  in  tow,  and  shouldered  down some  steps  into  the  basement   area,  and  the  ex-Deb  banged  with both hands on the locked door.
Iadmit  Iwas  petrified,  but  also  so  <lam  hysterical  by  now  the whole  thing  struck  me  as  quite  funny,  so Ihad  an  inspiration,  and went  in  the  outside  can  there,  and  got  up  on  the  pedestal,   and, taking  a  chance,  Ishouted  through  the  ventilator,  'Cool,  if  you're there,  let  us  in, we're  customers!'  Then  we  waited  a  bit  more  out­ side  the  door,  and  the  eye-shutter  opened,  and  there  was  a  noise of   bolts   and   ironmongery,   and   the   door   opened   eight   inches, and  we  squeezed  inside-but  not  the  Hooray  numbers,  who  got barred.
Well, down in the  Santa  Lucia  club,  they  were  certainly putting up  an   old   troupers'   show-must-go-on   performance.   Because they
 


 
194	COLIN   M A C I N N ES
weren't cowering in corners, or putting up barricades, but hopping around to the strains of the juke-box , and sitting at tables drinking double rums: West Indians, a few Gis, and a small herd of brave hens from the local chickery. And all this while, from beyond the walls, that other noise that scared them, I hope, less than it did   me. A GI nine  feet high  cut  me out  with  the ex-Deb,  and  I sat down to have a breather. And then-out of the chicks' toilet, there walked Crepe Suzette.
For just a minute, I was shaken rigid . Then I leapt up, shot over, and grabbed the girl. She was shook rigid too, but only a  second, and we hugged like two Russian bears, then fell on two contem­ porary chairs.
'Crazy girl!' I shouted. 'Spill it quick! What the hell-' She kissed me still, and said, 'I came up a week ago.' 'And you not told me? Bitch!'
'And when I heard this, I came right over.' I looked at her. 'To be among the boys?' 'Yes.'
I kissed her at arm's length.  'Now,  crazy,  Suze!'  I  cried.  'Brave girl! Nice chicken! But it's mine you are now, not   theirs.'
She shook her head. 'Not while all this goes on,' she said. 'Well, it won't forever, hon,' I told her .
'But while it does, darl, I'm staying here.' 'So long as it's clear I've got the option.'
We laughed like two hyenas, and I went and fetched two drinks, and the side window crashed, and a petrol  bomb  came  in  and rolled among the dancers and exploded, and the electrics all cut out, and there were shouts and screaming.
Then, there was a noise like thunder on the stairs outside, and a crashing and hammering on the door, and by the light of the bomb Bare you could see the law rush in, and the fire service, not ·as if they were coming in to rescue anybody, but to capture an enemy position. Cats were being grabbed, and others weaving in all directions, and I'd lost Suze and the ex-Deb, so I followed a  Spade in through the ! dies' toilet, and we climbed out the window, and into a dark garden, and over a back wall.
There, this Spade and I, we both stood panting. And  I  said to him, 'Okay, white trash?'  And he said to me, 'Okay, darkie,'  and   it
 
A BSOLU T E  BEG I N N E RS	195
was Cool. We both  laughed-Ha! Ha! Hal-then  crept  up  to  some­ body's back  door, opened  it and tiptoed  through  the corridor  to  the front, and  out  down  the steps where a kid  was lying groaning, and  I shone my torch  on  him,  and  I saw blood, and the blood  belonged to Ed the Ted.
'Well!' said Mr  Cool.
' Yeah,' I sai<l too, and we just  left him  there, and  went  round in the street.
And there,  there was a pitched  battle. The Teds had  got the  law
hemmed up against the railings-anyway, I suppose they  must  have been hemme<l-and the rest of them were struggling with  the Spades and one another, with razors and  stakes  and  bike-chains  and  iron bars and even, at times, with knuckles. And  soon  I got scooped into the thing, and I heard  a  cry,  'Nigger's  whore!',  and  through  arms and bodies I saw Suze, and they'd  got hold  of  her, some  chicks  as well as animals, and were rubbing dirt  all  over  her  face, and screaming if that's the colour she wanted to be, she'd got it. And I screamed out too, with all my lungs, and I fought like a maniac and couldn't get at her, and next thing I was slugged and staggered, and was vomiting.
Then  someone heaved  me up,  and  it was a Hooray Henry, and   he
said, 'Are you all right, old man?' And I said, 'No, old chap, and will you for Christ's sake try and get my girl.' Well, they had. Some more Hoorays and the ex-Deb had dragged her into the vintage vehicle, and I piled in too, an<l the Henry at the wheel  said,  'Where  to now?' and I said, 'Home!'
It was all I could do to keep them off the premises  once we  got there, because they were high and  the  ex-Deb,  in  particular , wan ­ ted to help Suze, but I said, thank you all very much, but would you please  all fuck off, and  leave  us, which  they  did, and  we   staggered u p, arm in arm, falling all over each  other,  and  there,  when  we got up to my place, sitting holding his dreadful  hat,  was  my  half­ brother  Vern. 'Where you  been?'  he cried.
I didn't answer, and  we  both  flopped. Vern  came over,  looked at us, an<l said, 'Your Dad's nearly gone. Ma said  you  got  to  come down  there right away.'
'In a minute, Vern,' I said.
Then  I kissed  Suzette, vomit, and  black  face, and all.
 
196	COLI N   :M A CI N NES
'You got to come!' Vern kept saying, tugging me.
'In a minute, Jules,' I said. 'Do beat it now, boy, I'll come right clown as soon as ever. Do get 011t of here just now,' ancl I  pushed him through the door.   ·
Then I came back to Suze and said, 'We'd better wash you.'  She got up, looked at herself in the glass, and said, 'No, I like it this way. Itsuits  me.'
'Hell, no,' I said, and went and got the bowl and things,  and washed her all over, and I kissed her between,  and  there  in my place at Napoli we made it at last, but honest, you couldn't say that it was sexy-it was just love.
Then I whipped up some eats, and we sat on the bed scoffing like some old married couple, and I stopped, and  stared  at  her,  and said, 'You're a mad girl, you know.'
She gave me a look.
'Yeah,' I said. 'And now it's going to be wedding bells.' 'Not for three years,' she said. 'There's got to be a divorce.'
'Oh, to hell with three years!' I cried, and grabbed her left hand, and pulled off Henley's Bond street ring, and went over to the window and threw it out there in Napoli. 'No reward for the  finder!' I cried to the early dawn.
Then I turned round. 'What about  Wiz?'  I  said.  'What  is  it makes you betray?'
'Some like it,' she said. 'It's a big kick to some,' then she went on eating.
'Well,'  I  said,  'old  Wiz  must  sort  it  out  with  Satan  when   he
meets him.'
'You believe in all that?' she said, getting up too.
'I certainly believe in Satan after tonight,' I told her, then came over again and said to her, 'The new Napoli Flikker. I hope the Spades sort him out.'
'Or you,' she said.
'No, not me, Suze. I'm cutting ont of Napoli, and so are you.' She looked at me again.
'We're off on our honeymoon,' I said, 'tomorrow. No, I mean it's today.'
She didn't let go, but shook her head. Tm not leaving here,' she said, with her pig-headed look returning, 'until it's over.'
 
ABSOLUTE  BEGINNERS	197
I grabbed her hair and wiggled her head about. 'We'll talk about that,' I told her, 'a bit later. Now I must get down to Dad.'
'Now?'
'Yes. Bed down, chicken, I'll be back to bring you in the milk .'
I can't tell you what I felt, seeing Suze lying there on my bed, where I'd so often thought of her, and I ran back and kissed her till she struggled, then beat it out into the area and early morning.
But in the area, no Vespa! 'Good luck to them!' I  cried,  and started off on foot along the road. I guessed I'd have to make it up to the Gate to get a taxi, and I certainly wasn't going back into the bull-ring to ask any sort of motorist whatever for a lift. So I hoofed it along, and the streets were very quiet, like the silence after the crash of broken glass, and the green trees had the light on  them again, and looked fresh and everlasting. Then some cat tried to run me down.
I whipped round, ready to murder this one, weak  though  I was, but who should it be but Mickey Pondoroso, at the wheel of his snazzy en Pontiac. 'Mickey!' I cried. 'Buenas dias! What the hell you doing in this asylum? You been studying some more conditions?'
Well, believe it or not, the diplomatic number had been doing exacty that: touring the area, poking his dam nose in everywhere, and he'd ended spending two hours at the section-house, because there'd been some little arguments over his car-and, would you believe it, too, on whether his dark face was Negroid or not, and this had infuriated the Latin American cat, because apparently his grandma was a Spade, and he was very proud of her and of her race, and he had stacks of cousins in the national football team which, I must know, had won the cup this year in 1958, and, by God! was going to win it next year too, and those hereafter.
I cut the cat short. 'Mickey P.,' I said, 'you're hired! You're driv­ ing me down to Pimlico, please, and it's very urgent.'
On the way, I asked Mickey which of the countries that he's been in had the least colour thing of any, and he said at once, Brazil.  And I said, okay by me, the moment I've got the loot, I'm heading it  out to Brazilia forever with my bird.
Because, in this moment, I must tell you, I'd fallen right out of love with England. And even with London, which I'd loved like my mother, in a way. As far as I was concerned, the whole  dam    group
 


 
198	COLIN   M ACIN NES
of islands could sink under the sea, and all I wanted was shake my feet off of them, and take off somewhere and get naturalized, and settle.
Mickey didn't seem to approve of this, although  I'd  thought the cat might be flattered. He said once a Roman, always a Roman, and in every country there were  horrors  as well  as felicities-that  was the word he used.
I said, that what had happened up in Napoli, could happen once again. That once you'd done some people, or group, or race  a wicked injury, especially if they were weak, you'd  come back  and do it again, because that was how it was, and with people, too.
And  he said, but  didn't  I realize  these  things  could  happen  any­
where?
I answered to this, I didn't mind so  much  its  happening.  But what I did mind is, that ever since Nottingham, more than a week ago, nobody had reacted strongly: so far as the government and top cats who control things were concerned, these riots might just not have happened at all, or have been in some other country.
Well, he delivered me at the door, and I said farewell, and thanks for the Vespa once again, I don't know what I'd have done  without it, and he cut off like Fangio wherever he was going to.
The door opened up at once, and it was Ma, and I could see immediately that Dad was dead. 'Where is he?' I said, and she took me up the stairs. Ma didn't say anything, except just as we went inside the door, 'He kept asking for you, and I had to tell him you weren't there.'
I don't know if you've ever seen a corpse. As a matter of fact, it was my first time, and it really wasn't impressive very much, except for the whole thing about death and dying. I hope that's not dis­ respectful: but as I  knew  for sure, before  I got  there,  Dad would be dead, I hadn't very much feeling  lef t  for  what  I  saw  there lying on the bed. All I felt, as a matter of fact, was so very much older. I felt that I'd moved one up nearer to something, now he was gone.
Ol<l l\fa was crying now. I had a good look at her, but it seemed perfectly genuine to me. After all, they'd been quite a while to­ gether, and I dare say time by itself makes something, even when there's no love at all. I gave the old girl a kiss, and rubbed her a   bit,
 
A BSOLUTE  BEG IN NERS	199
and got her downstairs, and said what about funeral arrangements. And she said she knew all that had to be done.
Then I said to her I was sorry, but I wasn't coming to the funeral. She didn't like this at all, and asked me why. I said, so far as I was concerned, Dad was what I remembered of him ever since I was a child, and I wasn't interested in corpses at all, and if she wanted flowers and hearses, that was up to her. She just stared at me  and said she'd never understood me, and then she said a thing that shook me a bit in my determination, which was, had I considered  what Dad himself would have wanted? So I said I'd think it over, and let her know, and meanwhile, good-bye, I was pulling out. She just looked at me again, said nothing, and went into her  parlour  and shut the door.
But as I was moving off, old Vern delayed me, and said he had to talk to me alone. I said I was very tired, but he pulled me out the back where I used to have my darkroom, and shut the door, and locked it, and said, 'You got to hear your father's secret.'
I asked him what.
He didn'.t say, but out of a comer he got the old  metal  box-the one you may remember where Dad used to keep the G. & S. gramophone records-and from it he took a large paper parcel, and he said, 'This is your Dad's book, he told me to give it  to you personal if anything should happen.'
I opened it up, and there it was-hundreds of  sheets  all  grubby and altered and corrected, except for the first one,  where  he'd written on a single page, 'History of Pimlico. For my one and  only son.'
Well, then I broke down. I sobbed like a boy, and Vern left me alone a bit, but I could see he hadn't ended, and he dragged the tin chest out and said, 'Look inside,' and there, on the bottom  of  it, were four big envelopes, and I opened them, and they contained stacks of pound notes.
'What's this?' I said.
'Your father's fortune. He saved it year by year.'
I looked at Vern. 'What did he say to do with it?'
Vernon swallowed a bit, didn't look his best, and finally said, 'Give it to you.'
'All of it?' I said.
 
200	COLI N   M ACIN N ES
'Yes.'
'And it hasn't been touched?' I said.
Old Vern looked really narked at this. 'You  little  bastard!' he said. 'You don't trust your own brother!'
I didn't answer that, but just  looked at all this loot, and   imagined
Dad hoarding it and hiding it. 'And he managed  to keep  all that from Ma?' I said: 'Well, one up to old Dad!'
Vernon said, 'You know all this should go into the estate?'
'It should?' I said.
'That's the law,' Vern told me.
I picked up two of the envelopes, and handed them to Vern. He hesitated, then took them. 'Aren't you going to count it?' he said.
'You want to?'
'Oh, no.' He frowned. 'This is quite all right with you?'  he said, very dubiously.
'I've given it to you.'
'And you won't tell Ma?'
I  grabbed  my  two  envelopes,  and  the  History  of  Pimlico,  and  I held out my hand and said, 'Not if you don't, brother,' and he shook it,  and  managed  to  raise  a  smile,  and  then  I  beat  it  out  of  that house forever.
Up by Victoria,  I bought  a hold-all  at a lost luggage,  and put   in
the book and money, and made it to  the  Air  Terminal. Because what with this all, my present feeling was I'd  leave Dad's body to Ma, and Suze to get over loving Spades, and me, I was going away for a while, and perhaps not coming back.
At  the  Air  Terminal,  all was  bustle. I went  into the  gents,  aml
sorted out the loot which, so far as I could see, sitting counting it on the pedestal, was about two hundred, plus or minus. Then I had a wash, and grabbed my hold-all, and went up to  the  wicket  and asked for a single ticket to Brazil.
Where in Brazil? the cat asked me. I said, anywhere.
He said, could  he see my  passport-and  I  whipped  it out,  and he
said I hadn't got a visa.
I asked him what the hell a visa was, and he said it was a thing you couldn't fly to Brazil without, a11d I said, okay, where could  I fly to withou t a hloody  visa?  And the cat answered,  quite  politely,
 
A BSOL UTE  BEG IN NERS	201
not to South America, but to parts of  Continental  Europe,  I could, so I say okay, give me a ticket to one of those.
The wicket number told me this was the wrong terminal for Europe, I'd have to go up to Gloucester road, and I said, okay, and went out and got a cab, and drove there, and on  the  way,  I'd decided I'd go to Norway, because I'd often heard from seamen Spades that they were nice to them up there.
Well, at Gloucester road, everything easy. They gave me a  ticket to Oslo, and by now I was getting crafty, and said how much loot could I export there? and they said  up to £250, but  I'd better get  a hit of local currency, so·I did that at another  wicket,  and found  I had an hour to wait, so I had a cuppa and a meat pie, and read the morning  newspapers.
The Napoli thing was big stuff all right that morning. They had it all over the place, and most of last night's occurrences, and a lot of columns in the leader sections. They were still on about unrestricted immigration, and how unwise it was, just as if it wasn't they who'd allowed it in the first place, and patted themselves  on the back  for the old mother country's generous hospitality, so long as everything went swimmingly. They said Welfare was an urgent consideration, and what was needed was a lot more experienced welfare officers to iron out awkward misunderstandings. A bishop had said on  the radio, Home Service, that 'various tensions and taboos divide us almost as strongly as those of race and creed in other countries.' There'd been some charges made at last, and the magistrate had advised people to stay indoors at night: meantime, the coloureds, it said, were having to get white friends  to  do  their  shopping  for them . Ministers were going to fly in from the Caribbean, and from Africa, to scan the scene, and the High Commissioner of somewhere had protested . Best news of all-really heartening-was that the cabinet minister in charge of home security had received reports  of all these happenings at his country house, and was studying them closely, and said the utmost strictness will be observed in the impartial enforcement of the law. Always 'enforcement ': never condemning! As for me, I always thought laws had some idea be­ hind them, some sort of principle, and it was this you should shout out above, not police courts.
Well, then  the loudspeaker  said  it was  all  aboard  for  Oslo, and
 


 
 

 

202	COLIN   MACIN NES
the strangest bundle of cats you can imagine got in a sort of bubble­ coach which was half double-decker, and I sat µp in the  arse part and surveyed the streets of London as we sped. Good-bye, old town, I said, good luck! We passed quite near Shepherd's Bush, where everything seemed free from tensions and taboos,  and we  made it out to the airfield which, I must say, was a splendid spectacle.
But I hadn't all that time for spectacles, because they fed us into a sort of sausage-machine of escalators and officials, and  I  had to think fairly quickly, because my idea was, to try and find where the Brazil flight began and, if I could, dodge the Oslo flight, and get on the Brazil one instead. Because experience has taught me that the more highly planned a sausage system is, the easier to feed yourself through the wrong part of it, if you keep your nerves about you.
So we went through the customs, where they seemed surprised I had only a hold-all with a handwritten book in it, but I said I had an auntie out in Norway to look after me. And at the currency check, they said wasn't that a lot of money for so young  a  feller,  and I said, wasn't it just! and got by that one. And at passports, they said was this my first passport, and I said my very first, and how did they like the photo, I'd taken it myself, and didn't I look a zombie? AJ11d after that, we all went into a great hall thing, overlooking the air­ field through huge glass panels, and the loudspeaker announcing departures, and me keeping my ears skinned.
I got a Coke, and went and gazed, and it certainly was a sight! All those aircraft landing from outer space, and taking off to all the nations of the world! And I thought to myself, standing there look­ ing out on all this fable-what an age it is I've grown up in, with everything possible to mankind at last, and every horror too, you could imagine! And what a time it's been in England, what a period of fun and hope and foolishness and sad stupidity!
Then they announced the flight to Rio. I joined the wrong queue, just like I was a regular traveller to there, and we had  no check  at the exit, nor when we walked across the tarmac to the aircraft, until we met a chick who stood with a board beside the staircase, asking people their names as they got on. I put myself in between a family, hoping they'd think I was cousin Frank or someone, and the chick asked my name, and I pointed at her list to  a  name  she hadn't ticked,  and  she said,  could  she have  my  embarkation  card,  and I
 
A BSOLUTE   BEG IN NERS	203
said what embarkation card? and she smiled politely and said one like all these, and so I gave her up mine,  and she said,  tut, tut, wasn 't  I a silly boy, that one was for the Oslo flight, and  I'd   better h u rry back or I might miss it.
But I stayed down there, and watched the great plane taking  off for Rio. And just as it became airborne-crash!  down came the  rain in torrents out the heavens, and I held up my arms ii1 it, and opened my mouth and cried, ' More! More! More! That'll stop it up at Napoli! That'll do what the ruling olders can't do! That's the only thing to keep the whites and blacks and yellows and blues of Napoli indoors!'
Well then, just as I was going to get back into  the  sausage­ machine to re-connect with Oslo, in taxied a plane, quite close to where I was standing, and  up  went  the  staircase  in  the  downpour, and out came a score or so of Spades from Africa, holding hand luggage over their heads against the rain. Some had on robes, and some had on tropical suits, and most of them were young like me, maybe kiddos coming here to study, and they came down grinning and chattering, and they all looked so dam pleased to be in England, at the end of their long journey, that I was heartbroken at all the disappointments that were there in store for them. And I ran up to them through the water, and  shouted  out  above  the  engines, 'Welcome to London! Greetings from England! Meet your first teen­ ager! We're all going up to Napoli to have a ball!' And I flung my arms round the first of them, who was a stout old number with a beard and a brief-case and a little bonnet, and  they  all paused  and stared at me in amazement, until the old boy looked me in the face and said to me, 'Greetings!' and he took me by the shoulder, and suddenly they  all bmst  out laughing in  the storm.
