
The Grapes
of Wrath
John Steinbeck
Copyright 1939 John Steinbeck
To
CAROL
Who willed this book
To
TOM
Who lived it
Pa complained, "Now we're a-goin', where we goin'?"
"I dunno. Come on, give your han' to Rosashar
n." Ma took the girl's right arm to
steady her, and Pa her left. "Goin' somepl
ace where it's dry. Got to. You fellas ain't had
dry clothes on for two days."
They moved slowly along th
e highway. They could hear
the rushing of the water in the stream beside the road. Ruthie and Winfield marched
together, splashing their feet against the
road. They went slowly along the road. The
sky grew darker and the rain thicke
ned. No traffic moved along the highway.
"We got to hurry," Ma said. "If this here
girl gits good an' we
t—I don't know what'll
happen to her."
"You ain't said where-at we're a-hurryin
' to," Pa reminded her sarcastically.
The road curved along beside the stream
. Ma searched the land and the flooded
fields. Far off the road, on the left, on a sli
ght rolling hill a rain-blackened barn stood.
"Look!" Ma said. "Look there!
I bet it's dry in that barn.
Let's go there till the rain
stops."
Pa sighed. "Prob'ly get run out by the fella owns it."
Ahead, beside the road, Ruthie saw a spot of red. She raced to it. A scraggly
geranium gone wild, and there was one ra
in-beaten blossom on
it. She picked the
flower. She took a petal carefully off and st
uck it on her nose. Winfield ran up to see.
"Lemme have one?" he said.
"No, sir! It's all mine. I foun' it." She stuc
k another red petal on he
r forehead, a little
bright-red heart.
"Come on, Ruthie! Lemme have one. Come o
n, now." He grabbed at the flower in
her hand and missed it, and Ruthie banged him in the face with her open hand. He
stood for a moment, surprised, and then
his lips shook and his eyes welled.
The others caught up. "Now what you don
e?" Ma asked. "Now what you done?"
"He tried to grab my fl'ar."
Winfield sobbed, "I—on'y wanted one—to—stick on my nose."
"Give him one, Ruthie."
"Leave him find his own. This here's mine."
"Ruthie! You give him one."
Ruthie heard the threat in Ma
's tone, and changed her tact
ics. "Here," she said with
elaborate kindness. "I'll stick on one for
you." The older people walked on. Winfield
held his nose near to her. She wet a peta
l with her tongue and
jabbed it cruelly on his
nose. "You little son-of-a-bitc
h," she said softly. Winfield
felt for the petal with his
fingers, and pressed it down on his nose. They
walked quickly after the others. Ruthie
felt how the fun was gone. "Here," she sai
d. "Here's some more. Stick some on your
forehead."
From the right of the road there came a
sharp swishing. Ma cried, "Hurry up. They's
a big rain. Le's go through the fence here
. It's shorter. Come on, now! Bear on,
Rosasharn." They half dragged the girl acro
ss the ditch, helped he
r through the fence.
And then the storm struck them. Sheets of
rain fell on them. They plowed through the
mud and up the little incline. The black barn
was nearly obscured
by the rain. It hissed
and splashed, and the growing wind drove it
along. Rose of Sharon's feet slipped and
she dragged between her supporters.
"Pa! Can you carry her?"
Pa leaned over and picked her up. "We're wet through anyways," he said. "Hurry
up. Winfiel'—Ruthie! Run on ahead."
They came panting up to the rain-soake
d barn and staggere
d into the open end.
There was no door in this end.
A few rusty farm tools la
y about, a disk
plow and a
broken cultivator, an iron wheel. The rain
hammered on the room and curtained the
entrance. Pa gently set
Rose of Sharon down on an oily box. "God Awmighty!" he
said.
Ma said, "Maybe they's hay inside. Look, there's a door." She swung the door on its
rusty hinges. "They is hay," she cried. "Come on in, you."
It was dark inside. A little light came
in through the cracks
between the boards.
"Lay down, Rosasharn," Ma said. "Lay down
an' res'. I'll try to figger some way to
dry you off."
Winfield said, "Ma!" and the rain ro
aring on the roof dr
owned his voice. "
Ma!
"
"What is it? What you want?"
"Look! In the corner."
Ma looked. There were two
figures in the gloom; a ma
n who lay on his back, and a
boy sitting beside him, his eyes wide, stari
ng at the newcomers. As she looked, the boy
got slowly up to his feet and came toward
her. His voice croaked. "You own this
here?"
"No," Ma said. "Jus' come in outa the wet.
We got a sick girl. You got a dry blanket
we could use an' get her wet clothes off?"
The boy went back to the corner and brought
a dirty comfort and held it out to Ma.
"Thank ya," she said. "What's the matter'th that fella?"
The boy spoke in a croaking monotone. "Fust
he was sick—but now
he's starvin'."
"What?"
"Starvin'. Got sick in the cott
on. He ain't et for six days."
Ma walked to the corner
and looked down at the ma
n. He was about fifty, his
whiskery face gaunt, and his open eyes were vague and staring. The boy stood beside
her. "Your pa?" Ma asked.
"Yeah! Says he wasn' hungry, or he jus'
et. Give me the food. Now he's too weak.
Can't hardly move."
The pounding of the rain decreased to a so
othing swish on the roof. The gaunt man
moved his lips. Ma knelt beside him and
put her ear close. His lips moved again.
"Sure," Ma said. "You jus' be easy. He'll be
awright. You jus' wait'll I get them wet
clo'es off'n my girl."
Ma went back to the girl. "Now slip 'em off," she said. She held the comfort up to
screen her from view. And when she was naked, Ma folded the comfort about her.
The boy was at her side again
explaining, "I didn' know. He
said he et, or he wasn'
hungry. Las' night I went an' bust a winda an
' stoled some bread. Made 'im chew 'er
down. But he puked it all up, an' then he wa
s weaker. Got to have
soup or milk. You
folks got money to git milk?"
Ma said, "Hush. Don' worry. We'll figger somepin out."
Suddenly the boy cried, "He's dyin', I tell you!
He's starvin' to death, I tell you."
"Hush," said Ma. She looked at Pa and Un
cle John standing help
lessly gazing at the
sick man. She looked at Rose of Sharon huddled
in the comfort. Ma's eyes passed Rose
of Sharon's eyes, and then came back to them. And the two women looked deep into
each other. The girl's breath came short and gasping.
She said "Yes."
Ma smiled. "I knowed you would. I knowed!"
She looked down at her hands, tight-
locked in her lap.
Rose of Sharon whispered, "Will—will you al
l—go out?" The rain whisked lightly
on the roof.
Ma leaned forward and with her palm she brushed the tousled hair back from her
daughter's forehead, and she kissed her on
the forehead. Ma got up quickly. "Come on,
you fellas," she called. "You come
out in the tool shed."
Ruthie opened her mouth to speak. "Hush," Ma said. "Hush and git." She herded
them through the door, drew the boy with he
r; and she closed the squeaking door.
For a minute Rose of Sharon sat still in
the whispering barn. Then she hoisted her
tired body up and drew the comfort about her.
She moved slowly
to the corner and
stood looking down at the wasted face, into the wide, frightened eyes. Then slowly she
lay down beside him. He shook
his head slowly from side
to side. Rose of Sharon
loosened one side of the bl
anket and bared her breast.
"You got to," she said. She
squirmed closer and pulled his
head close. "There!" she sa
id. "There." Her hand moved
behind his head and supported it. Her fingers
moved gently in hi
s hair. She looked up
and across the barn, and her lips came
together and smiled mysteriously.
THE END
